  Θ́́EΟΛΟΓΙKΟΣ TPITOS. ΠΕΡΙ ΥΙΟΥ.  Ἃ μὲν οὖν εἴποι τις ἂν ἐπικόπτων τὴν περὶ τὸν
λόγον αὐτῶν ἑτοιμότητα καὶ ταχύτητα, καὶ τὸ τοῦ τάχους
ἐπισφαλὲς ἐν πᾶσι μὲν πράγμασι, μάλιστα δὲ ἐν τοῖς
περὶ θεοῦ λόγοις, ταῦτά ἐστιν. ἐπεὶ δὲ τὸ μὲν ἐπιτιμᾷν
οὐ μέγα· ῥᾷστον γὰρ καὶ τοῦ βουλομένου παντός· τὸ δὲ 1. Ι ἐπικόπτων] ἐπισκώπτων b ΙΙ ’τον λόγον] τῶν λόγων b II 3 ἐν τοῖς]
om ἐν c ΙΙ 7 πνεύματι θαρρήσαντες cde || 8 ἤμων] ἥμιν b ΙΙ 10 προσενεγκωμεν
f 1. We have stated our objections
to the hasty theology of the Euuomians;
but it is a harder task to set
forth our own. I will endeavour to
do so with the aid of the Holy Spirit,
— as indeed I have done before, but it
is more necessary now than ever, —
as briefly ἃς I can. 1. ἐπικόπτων] ’by way of check-
’ Αὐτῶν, the Eunomians. 2. τὸ...ἐπισφαλές] ’the danger.’ 4. τὸ μὲν ἐπισφαλές] κτλ.] taken
from Demosth. Olynth. i 7. 6. ἀντεισάγειν] not merely ‘to
state in opposition,’ but to ‘instate,’
to ‘substitute.’ 8. προσκυνουμένῳ] This does not
compel us to suppose that Gr. used
or was acquainted with the last part
of our present ‘ Nicene ’ Creed. See
the quotations in Hort Two Diss,
p. 88. 11. τοῦτο γὰρ μόνον] The verb
omitted would prob. have to be expressed
by perf. and pres. together;
’have been and are.’ Gr. refers to
former outspoken sermons of his
such as Orat. XX. For νέαν. cp. i 2.  τρεῖς αἱ ἀνωτάτω δόξαι περὶ θεοῦ, ἀναρχία, καὶ
πολυαρχία, καὶ μοναρχία. αἱ μὲν οὖν δύο παισὶν ‘Ελλήνων
ἐπαίχθησαν, καὶ παιζέσθωσαν. τό τε γὰρ ἄναρχον 2 εὐδοκιμεῖσθαι b || 6 om ὡς f || 7 γενηται] γένωνται b ‘Reg. Cypr.’ ||
9 διαχυθῇ bd ’Reg. Cypr.’ || IO νοούμενα] λεγόμενα ’Reg. Cypr.’ 1. τῆ ὑποστολῇ] Heb. x 38, 39
(Hab. ii 4). The word, as the context
here shews, implies a disingenuous
reticence; cp. Gal. ii 12,
13. 2. διττοῦ δὲ ὄντος] The Bene-
dictine editors compare Athenagoras
de Resurr. 1. 7. αὐτοί] the Eunomians. Gr.
incidentally shews how systematically
they went to work. 10. σωλῆνισφιγγ.] ’compressed in
α pipe.’ 11. χεόμ. κ. λυόμ.] Cp. ii 13. 2. Atheism, Polytheism, Monotheism,
are the three ancient opinions
about God. The second ends in the
same anarchy as the first, and we
leave it to the Gentiles. Our Monotheism,
however, is one where Three
Persons are joined in equality of
nature and in identity of will, — two
of the three being derived from the
first by what Scripture describes as
generation and emission respectively. 12. αἱ ἀνωτάτω δόξαι] ’the most
ancient opinions.’ 13. παισὶν Ἑλλήνων] a phrase
formed on the fashion of υἱοὶ Ἰσραήλ;
but the word παῖδες seems to be
chosen with a view to the verb
ἐπαίχθησαν. ‘With the first two
the children of Greece amused themselves.’ 14. τό τε γάρ] The γάρ gives
the reason why Gr. leaves those
theories to the children of Greece
(imperative). 17. ἀταξία γὰρ μ. λ.] ’Disorder
is the prelude to ’For
μελέτη (lit. ’practice,’ ’rehearsal’)
cp. i 7. 2. 6 γενητης] γεννήτης def || τῆ γε οὐσία] τῆ ἐξουσία ac (sed τῆ γε
οὐσία in marg.) g: τῆ γε οὐσία e in rasura 1. μ. δέ, οὐχ ἢν ἐν] ‘Not a souereignty
contained in a single person.’ 2. ἐστι γάρ] Such a sovereignty,
of a single person, does not necessarily
exclude the thought of discord
and confusion. It is possible to
conceive of a single entity being
divided against itself, and so becoming
many. The divine unity,
which we believe, is the result of
‘equality of nature, unanimity of
judgment, and identity of action’
‘of will.’ 5. πρὸς τὸ ἐν κτλ.] This complete
harmony of mind and will in
the Godhead is itself based upon
the concurrence of the other Blessed
Persons with that One of Their
number from whom They are derived,
viz. the Father. Gr. does not as
yet name the Father, nor indeed
any of the Persons, because he is
speaking in the abstract of the
divine unity and its conditions, and
so says τὸ ἐν and not rbv ἔνα. Α
comparison of v 14 shews that τῶν
ἐξ αὐτοῦ depends on σύννευσις, not
on τὸ ἐν. The ‘antecedent’ of ἐξ
αὐτοῦ (neut.) is τὸ ἐν. ib. ὅπερ] refers to the whole fourfold
description. It is perhaps not
impossible that such an unity should
exist among creaturely beings, but
our experience suggests no instance
of it, — only imperfect images of it.
The clause is of course parenthetical. 6. ὥστε] again refers to the
whole description. It will be seen
that οὐσία to Gr. means more than
φύσις. There is a moral element in
it, and not only a metaphysical;
ὁμοτιμία φύσεως is one of the things
which secure οὖσ’. μὴ τ. The reading
τῆ ἐξουσίᾳ gives no satisfactory sense. 7. μονὰς ἀπ’ ἀρχῆς] The language
comes perilously near the
Sabellian conception of πλατυσμός
(see Dorner Person of Christ div. I,
vol. 2, p. 156); but of course Gr.'s
tenses κινηθεῖσα, ἔστη) are not to
be understood in a temporal sense.
There was no time before the κίνησις
of which he speaks. For μάρι see
ii 9. 9. γενν. κ. προβ.] the γεννήτωρ,
of course, of the Son; προβολεύς, of
the Spirit. 12. ἀφελών κτλ.] Gr. knows no
other way of expressing the relation
of the Son and Spirit to the Father,
such as might get rid of material suggestions.  Πότε οὖν ταῦτα; ὑπὲρ τὸ πότε ταῦτα. εἰ δὲ δεῖ
τι καὶ νεανικῶς εἰπεῖν, ὅτε ὁ πατήρ. πότε δὲ ὁ πατήρ;
οὐκ ἢν ὅτε οὐκ ἦν. τοῦτο οὖν καὶ ὁ υἱός, καὶ τὸ πνεῦμα τὸ
ἅγιον. πάλιν ἐρώτα με, καὶ πάλιν ἀποκρινοῦμαί σοι. 1 θαρρήσωμεν ab II 3 ὑπερερρύη] ὑπερρύη dfg || 4 πέρι] + τῆς f || IO om
καὶ f 3. 13 πνεῦμα] + τὸ ἄγιον c ’Colb. I’ || 17 ει] + μὴ ’Coisl. 3’ 3. οἷον κρατήρ τις] The simile
is used by Plato Tim. 41 D; but,
as Jahn points out in his annotations
Elias, in a different connexion.
Gr. prob. refers to some Neoplatonic
author. 7. ἐπὶ τῶν ἠμ’. ὄρων] keeping to
consecrated by Christian
usage; cp. i 5. 9. ὥς πού φησιν] John xv 26. 3. The acts thus described are
above and before time, although it is
impossible to divest ourselves of ternporal
notions in attenmpting to illustrate
them. The Second and Third
Persons are not posterior to the First
point of time, though Their being
springs out of His. 11. ταῦτα] sc. τὸ γεννητόν and τὸ
ἐκπορευόμενον. This is shewn by
ὅτε ὁ πατήρ in the next line,
ib. ὑπὲρ τὸ πότε] above and be
yond a ’when.’ 13. οὐκ ἢν ὅτε οὐκ ἢν] He replies
with the phrase so well known at
the beginning of the Arian controlanguage
versy. ib. τοῦτο] sc. what is implied in
οὐκ ἢν ὁτε οὐκ ἢν, eternal. 19. ἔμφασιν] ’an image.’ In
order to convey any notion of what
is above time, it is impossible to
avoid the employment of temporal
imagery. Ἔμφασις is, however, used
in rhetoric for an innuendo, a sugin
gestion of something beyond what
the words express; and this may be
Gr.'s meaning here.  Ἠὼς οὖν οὐκ ἐμπαθὴς ἡ γέννησις; ὅτι ἀσώματος.
εἰ γὰρ ἡ ἐνσώματος ἐμπαθής, ἀπαθὴς ἡ ἀσώματος. ἐγὼ δέ
σε ἀντερήσομαι· πῶς θεός, εἰ κτίσμα; οὐ γὰρ θεὸς τὸ κτιζό- 2 συμπαρεκτεινόμενον c ‘Reg. Cypr.’ || 3 λαμβάνομεν b II 6 ἐκεῖνον def
τὸ ’δε ἀίδιον def || 9 ὢν] + ἐστιν bdf 2. πλὴν εἰ κτλ.) The only
way, Gr. says, is to adopt the
standard of Eternity. Eternity does
indeed suggest a kind of temporal
duration; that cannot be helped;
but we use it to denote ’an interval
or ’ commensurate with
things of a supra-temporal order,
not measured by any measurement
known to time. It seems best to
connect the πλὴν with εἰ καἰ μὴ δυνάμεθα,
and to treat the intervening
sentence (in accordance with Gr.s
manner) as parenthetical. 5. ἐκεῖθεν] sc. ἐκ τοῦ πατρός. 9. τοῦ φωτὸς ἤλως] The simile
is, of course, unscientific; but it
serves its purpose. 10. ἄναρχά πὼς τῷ χρ.] In a
sense, so far as time is concerned,
that which is Begotten and that
which Proceeds are without a beginning,
as no date can be assigned,
prior to which They had not begun. ib. μορμολύττῃ] ‘to scare’ with
μορμώ, or bugbear. 4. If difficulty is felt about the
‘generation’ of the Son by the Father,
the difficulty is not got rid rid by
making the Son a ‘creature’ instead.
It only arises from a carnal notion
of what is meant by generation, as
if there could be no higher hind of
generation. 15. πῶς θεός] which the Eunomians
acknowledged, though with
an interpretation of their own. 16. κἀνταῦθα] i.e. ἐν τῷ κτίζειν.
Α work of creation (lit. ‘founding’)
as known to man involves time in
which to work it out, desire for the
accomplishment, the formation of
a mental ideal, thought as to the
mode of execution, etc. Gr.'s objeel
is to shew that the thought of creation
on ’s part involves as many
difficulties as that of generation.  τίς οὖν ἐστὶ πατὴρ οὐκ ἠργμένος; ὅς τις οὐδὲ τοῦ
εἶναι ἤρξατο· ᾧ δὲ τὸ εἶναι ἤρξατο, τούτῳ καὶ τὸ εἶναι
πατρί. οὔκουν πατὴρ ὕστερον, οὐ γὰρ ἤρξατο· καὶ πατὴρ
κυρίως, ὅτι μὴ καὶ υἱός· ὥσπερ καὶ υἱὸς κυρίως, ὅτι μὴ καὶ
πατήρ. τὰ γὰρ ἡμέτερα οὐ κυρίως, ὅτι καὶ ἄμφω· οὐ γὰρ 4. 1 ἔφεσις χρόνος ac li 4 ἐννοεῖν] ἐπινοεῖν b ‘Reg. ’ 5 κυησεως]
κινήσεως d ΙΙ 8 τούτων] + δὴ ’Or. I’ || 9 ἐναίρειν ‘Reg. Cypr.’ ||
καινῆς] κενῆς be ’Reg. Cypr.’: + σου beg 15 του] rob: του f in
rasura || 17 πατρὶ] πατὴρ b ’Reg. a1’ 4. συνδυασμούς] ‘copulation.’ 5. ἀμβλώσεως] ‘miscarriage.’ 6. οὕτω] by such ways as συνδυασμός
and so on. 9. ἢ καί] ‘or else, ’ if the generation
of the Son does not fit in with
your select example, ‘get rid of Him
altogether as a result of your novel
scheme.’ 12. ἢ πνεῦμ’. γέννησις] i.e. His
generation ace. to His divine nature.
Ἐξαλλάττειν is freq. used intrans. 5. The Father never ωας anything
else but Father. While we
human beings are sons, as well as
fathers, He is absolutely Father,
and that alone. If we say that He
’has begotten’ a Son, we do
mean to imply a moment or date.
Scripture often uses tenses in a way
which differs from that of ordinary
life. 15. τίς οὖν] It is the ’s
question: ‘What father is there who
never began to be a father ?’ 17. οὔκουν π. ὕστ.] ‘He did
become Father at some subsequent
point, because (ace. to the foregoing
argument) He never began to be.’ 18. κυρίως] ‘properly, because He
is not at the same time Son.’
on the other hand, Gr. goes on to
say, are not ‘properly ’ fathers, because
we are ἄμφω, sons as much
as fathers. The variety of our relationships
makes it impossible to
consider any one of them an exhaustive
description of a human
being; but fatherhood expresses all
that the person of God the Father
is. 5 ἐγέννησεν αὐτὸ φησιν f || 12 τῆς] + θείας b 1. ἐξ ἀμφοῖν] not the same ἄμφω
as above, but here as if = ἐκ δυοῖν.
Gr. is thinking chiefly how our sonship
differs from that of the Eternal
Son, and leaves the difference of the
fatherhood. Each of us has two
parents, not one, so that we are in
a way divided between them. 2. κατ’ δλ. ἄνθρ.] another difference;
we only gradually attain the
position of human beings by a long
fashioning in the womb, and some
hardly attain it at all. In the last
clause no doubt Gr. means idiots
and persons otherwise deficient.
The wishes of human parents for
their offspring are often far from
being realised οἶοι μὴ τεθ.). 3. ἀφιέντες] The children in
many cases go their way, and the
parents theirs, and nothing is left of
the sacred relationship except the
name. 5. ἐγέννησε] We have been
using expressions like ‘begat’ and
‘is begotten,’ which necessarily
besides the notion of begetting,
the tense-notion of a moment when.
To evade the difficulty, Gr. proposes
to use a formula which puts the
‘moment’ back before the beginning
of time, and to say that the Son
‘was’ already ‘begotten from the
beginning.’ 9. γραφὴν ἀποίσεις καθ’ ἤμ’.] a
legal term, which has only an accidental
relation to the use of γραφὴ
immediately after in the sense of
’Scripture.’ It means ‘to file an
accusation? ib. παραχαραττόντων] ‘putting
a false mark ’ i.e. ‘falsifying’;
chiefly used of coin that has been
tampered with. 11. ἐνηλλαγμ. τ. χρδν.] Much of
our language which denotes time is
used in an inverse manner to the
time intended. 14. ἴνα τί ἐφρ.] Psalm ii 1.  τοῦτο μὲν δὴ τοιοῦτον. οἷον δὲ αὐτῶν κἀκεῖνο, ὡς
λίαν δύσερι καὶ ἀναίσχυντον* βουληθείς, φασι, γεγέννηκε
τὸν υἱόν, ἢ μὴ βουλόμενος. εἶτα δεσμοῦσιν, ὡς οἴονται,
ἀμφοτέρωθεν ἅμμασιν, οὐκ ἰσχυροῖς, ἁλλὰ καὶ λίαν σαθροῖς.
εἰ μὲν γὰρ οὐ θέλων, φασί, τετυράννηται. καὶ τίς
το ὁ τυραννήσας; καὶ πῶς ὁ τυραννηθεὶς θεός; εἰ δὲ θέλων,
θελήσεως υἱὸς ὁ υἱός· πῶς οὖν ἐκ τοῦ πατρός; καὶ καινήν
τινα μητέρα τὴν θέλησιν ἀντὶ τοῦ πατρὸς ἀναπλάττουσιν.
ἓν μὲν οὖν τοῦτο χαρίεν αὐτῶν, ἂν τοῦτο λέγωσιν, ὅτι τοῦ
πάθους ἀποστάντες ἐπὶ τὴν βούλησιν καταφεύγουσιν· οὐ 3 εἴη] ην f 6 φασι] φησι df || 7 οιονται] οιον τε ’duo Colb.’ ||
11 καινὴν] κενὴν ’Reg. Cypr.’ 1. ἐν ποταμῶ Psalm lxv (lxvi)
6. 4. τετήρηνται] ‘have been observed.’ 6. ’Did the Father beget the
Son,’ asks the opponent, ‘by an act
of will, or not? If not, He was
tinder constraint, which is impossible;
if so, then the Son owes His
being not to the Father only, but
also to the Father's will, zvhich thus
becomes α kind of motherhood.’ This
dilemma is met by a similar one
with regard to the ’s οὗκ
birth, and by another with regard to
creation. Gr. then shews that ἃς a
word is not the result of speaking,
considered as α separate ajtd sub-
stantive thing, but springs direct
from the speaker, so the thing willed
springs not from will in the abstract,
but direct from him who wills. 8. σαθροῖς] Cp. i 3. 11. πῶς οὖν ἐκ τοῦ π.] It certainly
seems a strangely captious
argument. If it was ever seriously
urged by the Eunomians, we must
suppose that θέλων is not merely =
ἑκών, but ’by willing’; i.e. it was
the act of will which produced the
Son. Then, as other faculties of
the divine being are represented to
us as hypostatic — notably the Λόγος
— we are driven to suppose that
this primary faculty, antecedent and
necessary to the production of the
Son, is hypostatic also. If that is
the case, He does not owe His
being solely to the Father, but
partly also to the ’s Will,
which is thus constituted a kind of
mother in the Godhead. But Gr.'s
subsequent words ἂν τοῦτο λέγωσιν
suggest the doubt whether he did
not himself invent this part of the
argument for the Eunomians. 13. αὐτῶν] depends upon χαρίεν
(av εἴη) by an idiom well known in
colloquial English as well as in
Greek; ‘it it will be delightful of
them.’ 14. οὐ γὰρ πάθος ἢ β.] This is
true; nevertheless it is difficult for
the human mind to imagine an act
of will which is not caused by something
which would come under the
description of a πάθος. 2 αν] ἔαν b || 3 εθελης] θέλῃς def ΙΙ 7 θεληματος] θελήσεως def || 10 υπεστησε]
+ θεὸς bcd: + ο θεὸς ef || 14 θελησει] θέλησις b || om γὰρ b || 15 ἐστιν
οἴμαι θέλων bdf 1. τὸ ἴσχ’. αὐτ’. ö τι λ] ‘what they
consider their strong point? Δεύτερον
δὲ corresponds to ἐν μέν. Before,
however, entering upon this
δεύτερον, which he does at ἀλλ’ ἐπὶ
τ. θ., Gr. thinks it best πρότερον)
to grapple with his adversaries at
closer quarters. This he does in the
question σὺ δὲ αὐτός κτλ., which
brings the argument home to them
personally ἐγγυτέρω). 5. οὐ γὰρ δὴ τὴν φύσιν ἐρεῖς]
‘You will not say that he was compelled
by nature. Nature admits
equally of self-restraint.’ 10. ὑπέστησε] ‘gave them existence,’
ence? i.e. by creation. 12. ἐσηρηται τοῦ θ.κ. τὰ κτ] As,
ace. to their supposed argument,
the Son is deprived of the Father
by the interposition of the Will
from which He sprang, so is creation
deprived of its Creator. His
Will runs like a wall between it
and Him. The Eunomian is the
first to suffer the loss, because
he invented it; that is poetical
justice. 15. ἕτερον οἷμαι] Gr.'s argument
is not very clear; because the Eunomians
also had distinguished very
sharply between the will and the
person who wills, — so sharply that
they said that the Son could not be
the Son of one who willed to beget
Him, but only of that will itself.
But in so arguing they set up
a new, though fictitious, identity.
They converted the will itself into
a personal agency. This is what
Gr. combats. Will is one thing,
and the person who wills is another.
You might as well say that the
thing begotten is the son of beget-
ting, or trace the thing spoken to
speaking instead of the speaker, as
thus erect will into a substantive
and independent force.  Βούλει τι προσπαίξω καὶ τὸν πατέρα; παρὰ σοῦ 1 μεθύωμεν b ΙΙ 5 γεννῶντος cdefg || 7 δεξ̣ͅομεθα deg ‘Or. 1’ 1. τὰ μέν] i.e. the series θέλων,
γεννῶν, λέγων; τὰ δέ, i.e. the series
θέλησις, γέννησις, λόγος. 3. οὐδὲ γὰρ ἕπεται πάντως] Gr.
is using ἕπεται in its logical sense.
He does not mean that in the order
of facts the act of will sometimes
fails of its effect; he means that it
does not ‘follow’ that, because a
thing has been willed, that thing is
the result of will. It is the result
of the personal force lying behind
the will. 5. τὰ τοῦ θεοῦ δέ] All this holds
true even in the experience of our
limited personalities; much more
may we suppose it to be so in
regard to the divine nature. With
God, so far as we know ἴσως), will
and action are identical, and there
is no medium whatever. 7. καὶ τοῦτο] i.e. the proposition
that γέννησις = ἡ τοῦ γ. θ. Gr. evidently
inclines rather to the view
that ‘the generation ὁ the Son of
God is even above and beyond
will.’ 7. Gr. retaliates by asking how
God comes to be God. If by His
will, when did He first will it? is
one portion of His being the result of
the will of another portion? is He
not in this case as much a child of
will as the Son? If He is God
without willing to be so, then He is
under compulsion. ‘How then, is the Son begotten?’
asks the Eunomian. ‘How is He
created?’ οἱ. replies. Men do
create in the way which it is
to assume was ’s way. 9. βούλει τι κτλ.] ’Do you wish
me to make sport awhile with the
Father also? ’ Hitherto the ‘sport’
has been with the Son. Gr. intentionally
uses a shocking expression. 11. καὶ ὅπως ἀποφ.] ’and in order
that you may escape: The main
verb is the imperative implied in
the question πότε. . . ἠργμένος μόνος — ‘tell
me when.’ 12. πρὶν εἶναι] sc θεός; ‘not befpre
He was so; for He tvas never
anything before.’ 13. τὸ μὲν αὐτοῦ] ‘or did one part
of Him will it, while the other part
was the result of that will?  Πῶς οὖν γεγέννηται; οὐκ ἂν ἢν μεγάλη ἡ γέννησις, 7. 1 ουν] + φησι bedf ΙΙ 6 ειποις] + ὅτι b 8. 13 οιει] οιη e || τα ce race 2. εἰς τὸ εἶναι] again ’ to be so,’
i.e. θεός. 3. καἰ ταῦτα κτλ.] ‘and compelled
to that very thing, namely to
be God.’ 4. πῶς οὖν] Gr. returns rapidly
to the original question, and again
parries it by the counter question
as to the creation of the Son. The
difficulty of imagining the creation
is as great as that of imagining the
generation. 7. ἔργου δύν. ἔσχειν] ‘how came
it to have that effective force?" 9. οὕτως] sc βούλεται καἰ λόγει. 8. You do not understand your
own generation, or the law of your
own development; how can you expeel
to understand that of God?
That, however, ἲς no proof that God
does not beget. If nothing is to be
true but what you understand,
must reduce the list of existences,
beginning with that of God Himself
The mode of the divine generation
is evidently beyond us. 14. λόγους συμπ.] ‘the formulae,’
or ‘laws.’ 16. τροφῆς ἐξομ.] ‘assimilation of
food.’ 17. μνήμην, ἀνάμν.] Cp. ii 22. ib. τίνα μέν] ‘what things belong
to the united compound of soul and
body.’ 19. τὰ μεμερ.] We might have
expected μεμερισμένων, ‘belong to
soul and body apart’; but it
‘which are the things distributable’
to soul and body respectively. 2 φιλοσοφήσεις af: -σοις ‘Or. Ι’ ΙΙ 9 ἀπάντων] πάντων ef ΙΙ οὐδὲ] οὐ bf || 1. ὧν γὰρ ὔστ. ἡ τελ.] Although
some parts and faculties of our nature
only reach their perfection at a
later time, the law of their development
ment is present in the very moment
of generation. 2. μηδὲ τότε] not even when you
have stated the laws of human development. 8. διαγράφειν] ’to cancel,’ ‘strike
off the list.’ Cp. v23. 11. κατάβαλέ σου τὰς ᾿ρ.] ‘drop
your dissipations. ’ The Eunomians
conceived of the orthodox theology
in a materialistic way, and proceeded
to apply to it language of this
kind. For ῥεύσεις cp. v 31; for
διαιρ. and τομάς cp. i 6. 15. δυσχεραίνων] ‘with loathing.’ 20. ἀμβλυωπίαν] ’the dulness of’
your ’blinded sight.’ 9. A fresh puzzle is proposed by
the Eunomian. Does the Son exist
prior to generation, or not? The
answer ἲς that there is no such
as a time prior to that generation.
It is from all eternity. There is no
more need to ask whether the Son is
ἐξ ὄντων or ἐξ οὐκ ὄντων than there
is to ask the same question concerning
the Father. We are not compelled
to believe that either one or the other
of two alternates is true. Take
instances. Is time in time or outside
of time? A man says, ‘I am
lying’: is he speaking the truth or
not? Were yon present at your
own conception or not? Both alternatives
may be false. The question
is absurd.  ὄντα οὖν γεγέννηκεν, ἢ οὐκ ὄντα; τῶν ληρημάτων·
περὶ ἐμὲ καὶ σὲ ταῦτα, οἳ τὸ μέν τι ἦμεν, ὥσπερ ἐν τῇ
ὀσφύι τοῦ Ἀβραὰμ ὁ Λευὶ, τὸ δὲ γεγόναμεν’ ὥστε ἐξ
ὄντων τρόπον τινὰ τὸ ἡμέτερον, καὶ οὐκ ὄντων· ἐναντίως
περὶ τὴν ἀρχέγονον ὕλην ὑποστᾶσαν σαφῶς ἐξ οὐκ ὄντων, 9. 1 τῶν] ω τῶν e || 6 ἀγένητον] ἀγέννητον def ΙΙ ἀναπλάττουσιν e ||
7 τὼ εἶναι τὸ] τὸ εἶναι τὼ ‘Reg.’ a’ 9 η τὸ μὴ] om τὸ cd 1. ὄντα] Α fresh difficulty: was
the Son already in existence when
He was begotten, or not? Gr.
admits that the question might have
some meaning in regard to human
generation. In one sense we already
existed τὸ μέν τι); in another, we
then began to be (λγλόναμεν practically=ἐγενήθημεν). 3. ὁ Λευί] Heb. vii 10. 4. τὸ ἡμέτερον] = ἡμεῖς. 6. κἄν τινες ἂγ. ἀναπλ.] The
reference is to ’s Timaeus. ib. σύνδρομον τῷ εἰ. τὸ γ.] ’In
this ’ of the Eternal Son, ‘generation
is coincident with existence,
and is from all eternity.’ 7. ποῦ θήσεις] Where will you
find a place, a date, for your question
to apply to? ‘Already in
existence when He was begotten ’
implies a time before the begetting;
but there was no such time. He
was begotten from the beginning.
What was there before ’the begin-
ning, ’ that we may say whether the
Son then existed or not? In either
case, whether we affirm or deny His
existence, it is clear that that subsequent
moment at which we suppose
Him to have been begotten
cannot really have been the beginning. 10. εἰ μή σοι κ. ὁ π.] If you still
press your question, we will once
more ask you about the Father,
whether His existence is derived
from elements that were beforehand
or from elements that were not.
Perhaps then you will make out
that both propositions are true, and
that He has two modes or stages of
existence, one before and the other
after the absorption of those elements.
Or you will choose the
latter alternative, and say of Him,
as you say of the Son, that He
comes into being from nothingness.
If you are ready to admit this of the
Father (such is the force of the εἰ
μή), there is some consistency in
what you affirm of the Son. 3 ἐκ ψάμμων] εξ ἄμμων a || οἰκοδομίας ac || 12 om η ’duo Reg.’ 1. ö μὲν πρ., δ δὲ ὤν] For this
use of δ (here accus.) cp. Matt.
xiii 8. 4. μ. αὔραις ἵστανται] ‘cannot
even stand a puff of wind’; a natural
use of ἴστ’. but difficult to parallel.
ib. τούτων] of the two alternatives,
ὄντα ἢ οὐκ ὄντα γεγέννηκεν. 5. τὸ ἄπορον τὴν ἀπ’.] Α chiasm:
ἀπάντ. corresponds to ἐρώτ., as τὸ
ἄπορον to τὸ ἄτοπον. It is not that
the encounter presents a difficulty,
but the question presents an ab-
surdity. 10. τί παρὰ τοῦτον ὄντι] ’what is
it besides the time which is in it?
and how does it contain that ?’ 12. τοῦ δέ, Νῦν ἐγὼ ψ.] Α well-known
puzzle. ’"I am now telling
a lie." One thing or the other; is
the statement true or false? We
will not admit that it is both.
you answer, it is impossible to adopt
the one alternative to the exclusion
of the other, for if he is lying, he
speaks the truth, and if he speaks
the truth, he lying.’ 15. τί οὖν θαυμαστόν] As, in the
case of the ψευδόμενος, contradictories
are reconciled, so we need
not be surprised if, in the proposed
dilemma of ὄντα ἢ οὐκ ὄντα, both
alternatives are false. 17. ἠλίθιον] ‘silly.’  Ἀλλ’ οὐ ταὐτόν, φησι, τὸ ἀγέννητον καὶ τὸ
γεννητόν. εἰ δὲ τοῦτο, οὐδὲ ὁ υἱὸς τῷ πατρὶ ταὐτόν. ὅτι
μὲν φανερῶς ὁ λόγος οὗτος ἐκβάλλει τὸν υἱὸν τῆς θεότητος,
ἢ τὸν πατέρα, τί χρὴ λέγειν; εἰ γὰρ τὸ ἀγέννητον οὐσία ΙΟ
θεοῦ, τὸ γεννητὸν οὐκ οὐσία· εἰ δὲ τοῦτο, οὐκ ἐκεῖνο. τίς
ἀντερεῖ λόγος; ἑλοῦ τοίνυν τῶν ἀσεβειῶν ὁποτέραν βούλει,
ὦ κενὲ θεολόγε, εἴπερ ἀσεβεῖν πάντως ἐσπούδακας. ἔπειτα
πῶς οὐ ταὐτὸν λέγεις τὸ ἀγέννητον καὶ τὸ γεννητόν; εἰ μὲν
τὸ μὴ ἐκτισμένον καὶ ἐκτισμένον, κἀγὼ δέχομαι. οὐ γὰρ 1 σεαυτοῦ] ἑαυτοῦ ’in nonnull.’ || 2 απαιδευτον] + το bdf 10. 7 φασι b ||
10 χρὴ] + καὶ cef Ἴ’ 13 κενε] καινὲ c 1. ἀλλ’ ἀπαίδευτον] Ἀλλά = at;
as above, ἀλλ’ οὐκ ἐνδέχεται. ‘Nay,
you will answer, it is stupid to
enquire about a single individual,
whether he is present with himself,
or not. Those things apply to other
people, not to oneself.’ 5. διευθύνεσθαι] ‘to be setting
people to rights about the question
whether.’ 6. περὶ τῶν χρ. διαιρ.] ᾿about
things which are divided by an interval
of time.’ 10. ‘Begotten and Unbegotten
are not the same; therefore if the
Son is begotten and the Father unbegotten,
the Son differs from the
Father.’ The statement is false;
it is the very meaning of generation
to transmit the nature of the parent.
The contrast of begotten and unbegottens
is only like that of wise and
uniwise, which can be predicated of
different individuals without involvomg
α difference of nature or essence.
To erect Unbegottenness into Constituting
the very essence of God
brings you into difficulties with other
attributes, like Immortal, Unchangesable,
able, which have ἃς good a right to
be considered ἃς constituting that
essence. 7. οὐ ταὐτόν] ‘not the same thing’;
i.e. a difference of nature itself is
involved. 14. πῶς οὐ ταὐτόν] llOt ’ III what
sense do you ’ for Gr. is not
prepared to admit that it is true in
any sense ; but simply challenging
the statement altogether: ’ how can
you say so? if you had said thai
created and uncreated are not tin
same, I should agree with you,
but the transmission of the ’s
nature is of the very essence of
generation.’  ταῦτα μὲν οὔ φασι, κοινὰ γὰρ καὶ ἄλλων. ὃ δὲ
μόνου θεοῦ καὶ ἴδιον, τοῦτο οὐσία. οὐκ ἂν μὲν συγχωρήσαιεν 1 γεγεννημένον] + οὐ ταὐτὸν λέγεις dg || 1 φύσις] + γεννήτορος καὶ be ||
3 φύσιν] + τὸ γέννημα b || 4 εἰ μὲν] + γὰρ e || 5 τὴν ἄγεν.] om τὴν e 5. τὴν ἀγενν. αὐτήν] ’ unbegottenness
itself? the very character of not
being begotten. 7. περὶ ταὐτὸν δέ] not, of course,
περὶ τὸν αὐτόν. They are opposite
characteristics, but both are found
in man without any difference of
nature being involved. The wise
man and the foolish man are alike
man. 8. οὐκ οὐσίας τ.] ‘they do not
divide the essences; they are divisions
(lit. divided) within (in connexion
with) the same essence.’ 9. ἢ καὶ τὸ ἀθ’.] Α fresh argument.
If τὸ ἀγέννητον constitutes
the divine nature, so that it and
τὸ θεῖον are convertible terms, a
similar case can be made out for
these other predicates. Then, since
the divine nature is absolutely identified
with τὸ ἀγέννητον, and yet
at the same time with τὸ ἀθάνατον,
we are driven to suppose that these
are separate natures, or essences, or
that they compose the divine nature
by their aggregation. 11. Assume for the sake of argument
that to be unbegotten belongs
to God alone, though the assertion
would by some be denied. It does
not follow that unbegottenness is a
necessary part of the divine essence.
Adam alone was directly fashioned
by God; yet Seth is as truly man
as Adam. The divine essence is a
positive, not α negative thing. If
you ask me what it is, I can
answer that I hope we may know
some day, but not here. Meanwhile,
whatever glory there is in the underived
existence belongs to the Son
who is begotten of the Underived. 13. κοινὰ γάρ] Angels e.g. are
ἀθάνατοι; doves and lambs are called
ἄκακα. 15. οἱ καὶ τὴν ὔ.] The Platonists.
Gr. does not adopt their opinion.
He only uses it to embarrass the
Eunomian. He might have cited
in like manner the ’darkness,’ which
the Manichees made to be coeternal
with light ; but he disdains to do so. 11. 1 ἀγένητα de || 2 ριψωμεν] -ομεν b ΙΙ 5 γὰρ] + καὶ d || 6 fiovov]
μόνος c || 11 om ἐστι df || o] ω e2 || 14 om εἰς ’Reg. a’ 15 ws] +
φησιν b || 17 τούτω] τοῦτο g || 18 θαρρήσομεν] -ωμεν adef 2. ἔστω] for argument's sake, he
will assume that none but God is
unbegotten. That does not preclude
the possibility of One who is
begotten being God likewise, any
more than the fact that Adam alone
was directly formed by God precludes
others who are not so formed
from having the same nature as
Adam. 6. ovbt τὸ ἂγ. μόνον θεός] It
would not be true to say that only
what is unbegotten can be God —
though nothing can be God which
is not begotten of the Father; you
must admit that what is begotten of
Him is God likewise. 8. πῶς οὐσίαν θ. λ] How can a
merely negative attribute be spoken
of as constituting the essence of
God? Cp. ii 9. 11. ὂ τὴν φύσιν ἐστι] ‘what He
is by nature; nor what it is that
has no generation.’ 12. τοῦτο λέγειν] ’to ash the question.’
Πολυπρ., cp. ii. 9. 15. ὡς ἡ τοῦ ἂψ. vir.] Prob. Gr.
refers to 1 Gor. xiii 12; cp. ii 17. τοῖς ἐπὶ τ. καθαιρ] Gp. ii 12
τοῖς ἐνταῦθα κεκ. . . .πρὸς τὸ ποθούμένον. 18. εἰ καἰ μέγα κτλ.] If it is a
great thing to be altogether underived,
as the Father is, it is no
less a thing to be derived from Him
in the way the Son is. He shares
the nature and glory of the Selfexistent,
and has the additional
glory of being begotten of Him.
Cp. iv 7.  Ἀλλ’ εἰ ταὐτὸν τῷ πατρί, φασιν, ὁ υἱὸς κατ’
οὐσίαν, ἀγέννητον δὲ ὁ πατήρ, ἔσται τοῦτο καὶ ὁ υἱός.
καλῶς, εἴπερ οὐσία θεοῦ τὸ ἀγέννητον, ἵν ᾖ τις καινὴ
μίξις, γεννητοαγέννητον. εἰ δὲ περὶ οὐσίαν ἡ διαφορά, 4 σεβασμιον] σεμνὸν ‘Reg, a’ II χαμαιπετέσι] χαμερπέσι b 12. 6 ταῦτον
φασι τὼ πατρὶ ο ὑίος b: ταὐτὸν φ. ο ὑίος τὼ πατρὶ df || 7 ἀγέννητος bde ||
9 om ’δε c || 10 om η c 12.‘If ’the Father is unbegotten,’
they urge, ‘and the Son is what the
Father is, then the Son too is unbegotten.’
That would be true if
unbegottenness zuere the actual essence
of God; but it is ἴοι. If ‘unbegotten’
and ‘God’ were equivalent
terms, then we should be able to put
the one for the other, and say not
only ’ the God of Israel’ but ‘the
Unbegotten of Israel? On this theory,
the nature of the begotten Son is not
only different from that of the unbegotten
Father, but is its exact
opposite; and indeed it might be
argued that since the positive is prior
to the negative, the begotten Son is
prior to the unbegotten Father. 7. ἔσται τοῦτο] sc. ἀγέννητον
Quite true, Gr. replies, on the assumption
that unbegottenness is the
essence of God; the Son in that
case will be begotten-unbegotten! 9. περὶ οὐσίαν] The prep, is
emphatic. It is used as in § 10
sub fin. ‘If the difference between
begotten and unbegotten is (not one
of nature but only) one affecting the
modes of that nature.’ 10. πατὴρ τοῦ π.] ‘Are you your
father's father?’ If not, ace. to
your argument, you cannot have the
same essence as your father. 12. ἰδιότητος] not ’’personality’
but the special distinguishing peculiarities
which differentiate one person
from another; the ‘property,’
as Hooker calls it (E. P. v 51). If
we enquire at all what the nature
of God is, we will do so without
touching these individual properties. 8 εἰσαχθῆναι] ἀντεισαχθῆναι b 1. τινῶν ὁ θεός] ’God,’ acc. to
Gr., is a relative term; a ’ God ’
must be ’God of’ some one. If
then unbegottenness is the very
essence of God, and ‘unbegotten’
and ‘God’ are convertible terms,
then we must be able to say with
equal correctness, ’ the God of all ’
and ‘the unbegotten of all’; or
conversely, as the unbegotten is ’no
one's unbegotten,’ so God must be
‘no one's God.‘ The argument
does not seem a very valuable one,
because, to begin with, it must be
questioned whether ‘God’ is really
a term of relationship. If it be
so, then apart from creation God
would not be God. But the main
purpose of the argument is sound,
inasmuch as it shews the absurdity
of identifying absolutely the positive
existence of God with a merely
negative description. On Gr. ’s interprettation
of the word θεός, see iv
18. 3. ὁμοίως ἐκφέρεται] True synonyms
are used interchangeably (lit.
’are produced, employed, in a similar
manner’); cp. προφέρεται in § 5. 8. ἀνάγκη] If ἀγέννητον is the
very nature of God, and yet God
begets a Son (which the Eunomians
in a sense allow), it follows that the
nature of the Son is not only different
from that of the Father, but
is diametrically opposite to it. This
is not allowed by any one οὐ δέδοται). 9. αἱ ἔξεις τῶν ’στ’. πρότεραι] You
cannot take away a thing which is
not there to begin with. But ἀγέννητον
implies a taking away of γέννεννητάν.
Therefore γέννητον is prior
to ἀγέννητον, — the Son to the Father,
— and when the Father comes,
and His ἀγέννητον is alone recongised
as divine, He does away
with the Son who occupied the
ground before Him. Of course this
argument is one of mere mockery
ἐρεσχελία, i 3). 13. ’If the begetting of the Son
is not a thing finished ἀν’ ’done with,
it is as yet incomplete, and will one
day be completed: if it is finished, it
must have begun.’ That does not
follow. ἱν soul had a beginning,
but will never have an end. No; our belief is, that whatever
possesses the essential notes of a class
of beings — say of α horse or an ox —
is rightly called by that name, whatever
distinctive properties it may
have which mark it off from others
of the class. So it ἲς with God; the
nature is one, although there are
differences of designation, corresponding
to differences hi fact, between the
Persons who share that natitre.  τίς ἔτι λόγος αὐτοῖς τῶν ἀφύκτων; τάχα ἂν ἐπ’
ἐκεῖνο καταφύγοιεν τελευταῖον· ὡς εἰ μὲν οὐ πέπαυται τοῦ
γεννᾷν ὁ θεός, ἀτελὴς ἡ γέννησις, καί ποτε παύσεται.
εἰ πέπαυται δέ, πάντως καὶ ἤρξατο. πάλιν οἱ σωματικοὶ 13. 4 εἰ ’δε πέπαυται df || 15 λογος] ὄρος ’tres Colb.’ II 16 om καὶ c
17 μὴ λέγεσθαι] μηδὲ λ. df 1. τῶν ἀφύκτων] i.e. which they
consider to be so. 3. καί ποτε παύσεται] ‘and some
day He will stop,’ viz. when τελεία
ἡ γέννησις. This is more pointed
than to make πότε interrogative. 6. π,ρὸ πάντων β.] Prov. viii 25. 9. ἀποφανοῦνται] ’will they shew
to be the case.’ 12. οὐκἄραἢρκται κ.αὐτοὐςτὸπ.]
Therefore the thing which zuill one
day stop can never according to them
have had a beginning.’ So Gr. turns
their logic against them. 13. ὁ μὲν οὖν ἠμ’. λ.] sc. λέγει. 15. εἷς λόγος ἐστί] ’one ’ or
‘principle of existence’; and so, from
the observer’s point of view, ‘definition.’
What is implied may be seen
by the corresponding words in the
apodosis, οὐσίαν κ. φύσιν κ. κλῆσιν.
The meaning is not the same as in ὁ
ἡμέτερος λ. just before, nor has it any
relation to λέγεσθαι directly after. ib. ὃ μὲν ἂν μετέχῃ τ. λ.] ‘what.
ever shares that characteristic principle,
is rightly called by that name.’
Tοῦτο, however, is grammatically
the subject of λῆ., not the predicate. 17. οὕτω δέ] The ‘apodotic’ force
of δέ is well known. It recurs again
in the next section.  Ὅταν δὲ ἀνθυποφέρωμεν αὐτοῖς· τί οὖν; οὐ
κυρίως θεὸς ὁ υἱός, ὥσπερ οὐδὲ ζῷον τὸ γεγραμμένον; πῶς 4 ἥμιν ἐστιν f 14. 3 προσοίσουσιν bedef 1. κἂν ἐπινοίαις τισι] The distinctive
’notions’ which Gr. has in
view are, of course, those of giving
and of receiving life, of ‘proceeding ’
and its correlative. They are not,
however, to be considered as merely
subjective distinctions drawn by
us, any more than the distinctions
which we draw between one man
and another. Td ὀνόματα, sc. πατήρ,
υἱός, πνεῦμα. 2. ὃ μὲν ἂν κ. λέγηται] sc. θεός.
This seems hardly necessary to say;
but it lends a kind of fulness to the
following statement, ὃ δ’ ἃν ἢ κατὰ
φύσιν θεός), τοῦτο κ. ἅλ’. ὀνομάζεσθαι
θεόν). The ὀνομάζεσθαι = λέγεσθαι,
and has nothing to do with the ὀνόματα
above. 4. οἱ δέ] While names are not of
much importance, so long as we get
the facts right, they, the Eunomians,
when pressed, will use the name of
θεός to describe the Son, but explain
it to have no foundation in fact. 7. ταῖς μαρτυρίαις] ’’testimonies
of Scripture.’ Cp v 2 29. ib. ὁμώνυμον] ‘in an equivocal
sense.’ Ὁμώνυμα are in logic
which bear the same name but in
different senses. 14. ’ The word God,’ they
’is an aequivocum; it is used to
denote two things which are essehtially
different, as dig, for example,
denotes both α beast and α ’ Ah,
but in the one case there is no difference
in dignity between the two things
which bear the same name; in the
other, if your theory were true, two
beings would bear the same name
which cotild not be even distantly
compared. 12. ὁμ. ταῦτα εἶναι] The neut.
used, as in the preceding section, to
avoid the irreverence of a direct
reference to the Divine Persons. 13. τὸν κύνα] the name of a fish,
as well as of the beast. Both fish
and beast are quite properly called
’dog,’ but not in the same sense. 15. τοιοῦτον εἶδος] ’such a class’;
namely, ὁμώνυμα both of which
’properly’ bear the common name. 13 οιονει] οἶον a ΙΙ 17 μεταβαίνεις] ης (non ῃς) a: ει d1 2. δύο φύσεις] perh. ‘two kinds
of animals.’ 4. πρότερον...ὕστερον] as well as
μᾶλλον and ἦττον, qualify οὖσαν τοῦθ’
ὄπ. λέγ’. 6. οὐδὲ γάρ τι σ.] ’for there is
nothing attached to the name which
forces such distinctions upon ’
There is nothing in the name ’dog’
to make you care to enquire whether
the beast or the fish was the first to
bear it, or whether the beast is more
of a dog than the fish: the one 
of ’dog’ is for all practical purposes
as good as the other. The common
name is borne by creatures which,
though different from each other,
are equals. 11. ἐνταῦθα δέ] ’ But when
come to the case in point, you attach
to God an awful solemnity, and say
that He is too high to be described as
having any essence or nature, — athing
which belongs to none but God and
constitutes as it were the nature of
the Godhead; and you give this to
the Father, but take it away from the
Son, and make a subject of Him.’ 17. περικόπτεις] ‘mutitate.’
ib. τῆς τὸ 1. ἐχ’. ὁμων.] such as
that of the different ’dogs.’ 19. ὁ γραπτός σ. κ. ὁ ζῶν ἆ] The
real man and the picture of a man
(either of which is spoken of as ’a
man’) illustrate more nearly such a
Godhead as the Eunomians speak
of than the two kinds of ’dogs.’
The picture is not further from being
a real man than the Son is from
being really God, if the Eunomian
account is correct; and at the same
time it bears externally a greater
resemblance to its original.  Ἐὰν δὲ λεγόντων ἡμῶν, ὅτι τῷ αἰτίῳ μείζων ὁ 3 τῶν φύσεων] τῆς φύσεως ’nonnul.’ || 6 ἰσότιμον] + μὴ bedef 15. 11 om ’δε b ’nonnul.’ 1. ἢ δός] Otherwise, — if the
chasm between the two Persons
bearing the name of God is not, on
your theory, as vast as I have indicated,
suppose you admit that the
equivocal name is in this instance
applied to two natures of equal
splendour. You shall call them
different natures, if you like; but
admit that they are equal. What is
the result? You are no longer satisfied
with your illustration of the
dogs. You invented it to justify an
insinuation of inequality. The κατὰ
in κατὰ τῆς ἀνισ. appears to be used
as in the phrase τοξεύειν κατὰ σκοποῦ,
of the point aimed at. 5. εἰ τὸ ἴσ’. ἔχοιεν] It requires
great ingenuity to extract any meaning
from the sentence, in relation
to the context, if the reading μὴ
ἔχ. is adopted. The μὴ was evidently
introduced by copyists who
thought that Gr. was making a
statement of his own belief, which
was that the name θεός is applied in
precisely the same sense to Father
and Son. But this ignores Gr.'s
argument, — and, it may he added,
the meaning of ὁμωνυμία. Gr.'s
immediate purpose is to shew that
the Eunomian illustration is, from
their own point of view, ill-chosen.
To be of any service to them, their
instance of ’equivocation’ should
have been one where the same name
is applied to two objects of very
different value. 15.‘You admit,’ they say, ‘that
the Father is greater than the Son,
inasmuch ἃς He is the author of the
Son's being; but since He ἲς by
nature author of the ’s being, it
follows that He is by nature greater
than the ’ The fallacy of the
argument, Gr. annoers, lies in this,
—that they attribute to the underlying
essence what is predicated of
the particular possessor of that essence.
It is like arguing that because so and
so is a dead man, therefore man is
dead. 10. τῷ αἰτίῳ μ.] lby virtue of being
the cause of His existence. 11. προσλαβόντες τὴν . . . πρότασιν]
‘taking ὂν their minor premiss.
Πρότασις is the tehnical word for a
‘premiss’; the πρός in προσλ. denotes
that this is a second (or minor) premiss. 1. συνάγωσιν] ‘conclude.’ The
Eunomian syllogism is this: ’The
Father is greater than the Son inasmuch
as the Son owes His existence
to Him. But the giving of existence
to the Son belongs to the Father by
nature. Therefore the Father is
greater than the Son by nature.’ 3. οὐ γὰρ ἁπλῶς κτλ.] The
reply is that not everything which
is predicated of a particular thing
(e.g. of Socrates) is predicated of the
nature which underlies that thing
(in the example chosen, human nature).
Everyone recognises what
the statements are intended to
apply to, and how they apply. So,
what we say of the Father does not
necessarily apply to the Divine
Essence which belongs to Him;
some things apply to Him as Father,
not as God. 4. κατὰ τίνος, καὶ τίνα] The
words are interrogative; if Gr. had
intended the indef. pron., he must
have said δ. ὅτι κ. τ. It seems
necessary to understand κατὰ again
before τίνα, ’in regard to what
’ — i.e. in regard to nature, or
to individuality, or what. To take
the example given by Gr. at the end
of the section, if I say that Socrates
is a dead man, it is plain that I am
speaking of Socrates in particular
and of no one else, and that I am
speaking of Socrates in relation to
the bodily life, not about his soul,
nor about his influence. 5. τί κωλύει κἀμέ] Two can play
at that game, Gr. says. He too can
draw that kind of conclusion, and
they shall see whether it will hold.
He makes a major premiss of that
conclusion of theirs, ’The father is
by nature greater than the ’
(We need not suppose that Gr. is
for the moment speaking of God:
the words would suit any father and
son.) The minor premiss is, ’But
he is not by nature necessarily greater,
or necessarily ’ So far there
is no absurdity. He need never have
had a son; there might have been
nothing else to compare him with.
(Gr., 1 repeat, is not speaking of
God.) The right conclusion would
be that the ’s ’natural’ superiority
over his son consists solely in
his fatherhood, and not in his nature,
—in his relationship, and not
in that which he is when considered
apart by himself. But the false conclusion
which Gr. draws, to illustrate
the false conclusions of the
Eunomians, is this: ’Therefore the
greater is not necessarily greater, ’ or
‘The father is not necessarily father.’
It will be observed that Gr. says
μεῖζον, not 6 μείζων, which makes it
clearer that the proposition is intended
to be quite general: Ἁ thing
which is greater than another need
not be greater, but might be at the
same time equal or less; a father
need not be his ’s father, but
might be his brother or his son.’
The second paralogism ὁ θεὸς οὐ
πάντως θεός) helps to shew that this
is Gr.'s meaning.  Ἐκεῖνο δὲ πῶς παραδράμωμεν, οὐδενὸς ἧττον τῶν
εἰρημένων ὂν ἀξιάγαστον; ‘Ο πατήρ, φησιν, οὐσίας, ἢ 2 σύναγε cdefg ’duo Reg. Or. 1’|| 3 πάρα τὸ πη] παρατροπὴν (om και)
b: παρατροπῇ ‘Reg. a’ 3. παρὰ τὸ πῆ κ. ἁπλῶς] ’The
fallacy lies in arguing from the conditioned
to the absolute’ (lit. ’is on
account of that which is so for special
reasons and that which is so absolutely’). 4. τοῖς περὶ ταῦτα] ’to use the
technical language of logicians’ (lit.
’as it is customary to speak technically
for those who concern themselves
with these’). 5. ἡμῶν γὰρ κτλ.] ’For when
we allow that it is in the nature of a
cause to be greater than the thing
caused, they infer that it is greater
by nature; which is like arguing
that because we say, "Such and such
a man is dead." therefore man, in
the abstract, is ’ The emphasis,
of course, is on ὁ δεῖνα, and it
seems simplest to take ἄνθρ. along
with it as subject, understanding
νεκρός alone to be predicate — an
arrangement of words like ὁ μέγας
τέθνηκε Βασίλειος. But the sense is
the Same either way. In the apodosis,
τὸν ἄνθρ. is subject, the predicate
being supplied from the previous
clause, sc. νεκρὸν εἶναι. The
commentators from Elias onwards
have totally failed to catch the argument,
or even to understand the
grammar of the passage. If Gr. had
intended to say anything so pointless
as Petavius (de Trin. II v 12)
makes out, viz. that because ὁ δεῖνα
is a dead man, therefore he is a man,
he must have said τὸ ἄνθρωπον, not
τόν. So far Elias, whom Petavius
quotes, knew better. 16. ’ Well? they say, ’the word
Father must denote either nature or
operation: which is it to be?’ Neither,
is the answer; it denotes a relation,
and α relation which implies
community of nature between the
Father and the Son. 10. ἀξιάγαστον] ‘astonishing,’
from ἄγαμαι ’to wonder. ib. οὐσίας, ἢ ἐνεργ. ὄν.] ’is it a
name denoting essence, or operation?’ 12. ἑτεροούσιον] A word modelled
on the false analogy of ὁμοούσιος. It
should be ἐτερούσιος. 16. 5 διαφυγόντα] φυγόντα b || 11 οὐσία] οὐσίας e ‘Reg. Cypr. ||
14 αἱρήσετε] σητεb·. σεται d || 15 ’δε] γὰρ ’Reg. Cypr. aliiq. Reg. et
Colb.’ || 16 ἄλλως] + πὼς df || πέρι] πρὸς b || 17 om καὶ bc 1. οὗ γὰρ ὁ ἐνεργῶν] lit. ’where
there is one performing an operation,
there is also the result of the operation.’
It is not very obvious why
γέννησις should not be included
under the head of ἐνέργεια, and Gr.
does not much object to it. But
evidently Gr. ’s opponent made ἐνεργεῖν
= ποιεῖν. 3. ᾐδέσθην] iron. ‘I should have
stood in great ’awe.’ 7. σχέσεως] ’relation’’, explained
by τοῦ πῶς ὦι πρός κτλ. 10 κὰκεῖ when used in ref. to
the Godhead. 12. συνεισάξει] ’will at the same
moment imply the Son.’ 15. αὐτὸδἐ τοῦτο] ’His operation
will still have produced that very
result consubstantial with Himself.’ ib. εἰ καἰ ἄτοπος] The καὶ
be taken closely with ἄτοπος and
disjoined from εἰ, which has here the
force of ’since.’ The reading ἢ,
adopted by the Benedictines, makes
ἄλλως superfluous. The notion of
such an operation as results in a
Son’ would be absurd if it did not
imply a real (i.e. a consubstantial)
Son. 17. κακομαχεῖν] ‘to fight unscrupulously:
The word στροφάς,
’twists,’ shews that the μάχη is a
wrestling-match, not a battle.  Ἡμεῖς μὲν γὰρ ἐκ μεγάλων καὶ ὑψηλῶν τῶν
τοῦ υἱοῦ τὴν θεότητα καὶ κατειλήφαμεν, καὶ κηρύσφωνῶν
σομεν. τίνων τούτων; τῆς θεός, τῆς λόγος, ὁ ἐν ἀρχῇ, 17. 4 καὶ κατειλ.] om καὶ e ΙΙ 16 om ο πατὴρ ce 2. δέξη κἀντ’. πείθειν] ‘if from
that quarter you can find means to
persuade tis? 17. The titles given to the Son in
Scripture clearly shew His Godhead. 5. τῆς θεός] sc. φωνῆς. 6. ἐν ἀρχῇ ἢν] John i 1. 7. μετὰ σοῦ ἡ ἁ.] Ps. cix (ex) 3
where Swete reads μ. σοῦ ἀρχή. As
the Ps. addresses Christ, the statement
agrees with Gr.'s allusion to
the passage just above; for if the
ἀρχή (sc. the Father) is with Him,
He is with the ἀρχή. In the Ps.
the word ἀρχή was prob. intended
to mean ‘rule.’ ‘authority,’ not (as
Gr. seems to think) ‘beginning.’ 8. ὁ καλῶν αὐτήν] Is. xli 4 where
the true text is ἀπὸ γενεῶν ἀρχῆς,
the αὐτήν prob. being repeated from
the δικαιοσύνην of the previous vs.
I cannot find that any other father
uses the text in the same manner as
Gr. ib. ἐπειδὴ υἱὸς μ.] gives a justification
for the text just used, — or
perhaps for the orig. statement τὴν
θεότητα...κηρύσσομεν. The verb
ἐστίν, or καλεῖται, must be supplied:
’for He is the only begotten Son.’ 9. ὁ μονογ. υἱός] John i 18. Hort
Two Dissertations p. 20 mentions
that the phrase μονογενὴς θεός is
once used by Gr. (Ep. 202 p. 168 C).
It seems, however, from our present
passage that Gr. considered υἱός to
be the right reading in St John. 10. ἐγώ εἰμι ἢ ὁδ.] John xiv 6. 11. τὸ φῶς τ. κόσμου] John viii
12. 12. X. θεοῦ δύν.] 1 Cor. i 24. 14. ὃς ὢν ἀπαύγασμα] Hob. i 3. 15. εἰκὼν τῆς ἂγ.] Wisd. vii 26. ib. τοῦτον γὰρ b π. ἐσφρ.] John
vi 27. 17. ἔβρεξε κύριος] Gen. xix 24.  Σὺ δέ μοι καταρίθμει πρὸς ταῦτα τὰ τῆς ἀγνωμοσύνης
ῥήματα, τὸ θεός μου καὶ θεὸς ὑμῶν, τὸ μείζων, τὸ
ἔκτισε, τὸ ἐποίησε, τὸ ἡγίασεν. εἰ βούλει δέ, καὶ τὸ δοῦλον,
καὶ τὸ ὑπήκοον· τὸ δέδωκε, τὸ ἔμαθε, τὸ ἐντέταλται, τὸ
ἀπέσταλται, τὸ μὴ δύνασθαι ἀφ’ ἑαυτοῦ τι ποιεῖν, ἢ λέγειν, 18. 13 ἐντέταλται] ἐντέταλκεν b 1. ῥάβδος εὖθ’.] Ps. xliv 7 (xlv
6); Heb. i 8. ib. ὁ ὢν κ. ὁ ἦν] Rev. i 4, 8; iv
8; xi 17; xvi 5. In all these places
St J. seems to use the expression to
mean the Father. 6. οὐ γὰρ ἐκ προσθήκης] The
Father's perfection would be the consequence
of an addition, if He had
at one time been without the Son.
The words which follow, ἄλογος
κτλ., are all chosen with ref. to one
or other of the titles of the Son
above cited. 18. The htimbler language used
concerning Him belongs to the human
nature zvhich He assumed. 10. τὰ τῆς ἅγν’. ῥήματα] The
shade of meaning which Gr. intended
ἅγν’. here to bear may be gathered
from ὁ νῦν σοι καταφρονούμενος in
§ 19; ’the words which you scornfully
misunderstand.’ 11. θεός μου] John xx 17. ib. μείζων] John xiv 28. 12. ἔκτισε] Prov. viii 22. 12. ἐποίησε] Acts ii 36, Heb. iii 2. ib. ἡγίασεν] John x 36. ib. δοῦλον] Phil, ii 7. 13. ὑπήκοον] Phil, ii 8. ib. δέδωκε] The passage in Ath.
Or. iii c. Ar. ἑ 35 suggests John iii
35, but the context here may point
to John xviii 11. ib. ἔμαθε] Heb. v 8. ib. ἐντέταλται] There seems to
be no passage where the actual word
occurs in relation to Christ, nor ἐντέταλκεν
either. The ref. is prob.
to John xv 10 and similar passages. 14. ἀπέσταλται] John v 36, xx 21. ib. μὴ δύνασθαι...ποιεῖν] Johnv 19. ib. λέγειν] John viii 28, xii 49. 15. κρίνειν] John viii 15, xii 47. ib. δωρεῖσθαι] Matt, xx 23. ib. βούλεσθαι] John v 30. 16. ἄγνοιαν] Mark xiii 32. ib. ὑπ’ ὁτ’ ἂγ ἤν] Luke ii 51, 1 Cor.
xv 28. ib. εὐχήν] Luke iii 21 etc. ib. ἐρώτησιν] From the example
given in § 20, it seems that Gr.
refers to occasions like John xi 7 σου] σοι cdf || 8 ὁμότιμον] + τὼ πατρὶ bdf || 9 om οὐ e || 15 τὼ δια
σε] om τὼ c 1. προκοπήν] Luke ii 52. ib. τελείωσιν] Luke xiii 32, Heb.
ii 10 etc. 2. ὑπνοῦν] Matt, viii 24. ib. πεινῆν] Matt, xxi 18 etc. ib. κοπιᾷν] John iv 6. 3. δακρύειν] John xi 35. ib. ἀγωνιᾷν] Luke xxii 44. ib. ὑποδύεσθαι] ‘to slip away,’
‘withdraw’; — a quite classical sense
of the word. The ref. is prob. to
John x 39. 7. σπερμολογήσαις] ‘pick up,’
like a bird gathering up seed: cp.
Acts xvii 18. ib. συντιθέναι] ’to put together
vour equivocal God’; with ref. to
argument of § 14. 8. παρἐηραπτον] one whose
name has been fraudulently put on
the list. ib. ὁμότιμον] The words τῷ πατρί
are prob. only a gloss, though a correct
one. 9. κατὰ μόρος ἐπεξ. ἐξηγ.] ’to go
through them in detail and give you
a very religious interpretation of each,
and to clear away the offence whicli
you find in the letter of Scripture.’ 14. παθῶν κ. σῶμ’.] governed by
κρείττονι. The Benedictine editors
compare with this whole passage
Leo Serm. 45 de Quadr. p. 228.
See also his letter to Flavian § 4. 15. τῷ συνθέτω The words which
follow — τῷ κενωθέντι κτλ.— as well
as ἀσύνθετος in ξ 19, shew that Gr.
does not mean ‘to the composite nature,’
sc. the human nature composed
of body and soul, but ‘to Him
who is composite, made up of two
’ Or possibly, as die τῷ is
repealed, Gr. may have intended τῷ
συνθέτῳ to be the dat. of τὸ σύνθετον,
in the sense of ’the composite
whole,’ consisting of Godhead and
manhood. It would, of course,
have been more exact to have said
τῆ διὰ σὲ κενώσει, or something of
that kind; but it would have been
less vivid; and there was no fear of
any one supposing that Gr. meant by
τῷ κενωθέντι a different person from
Him who had the κρείττω φύσιν.  Οὗτος γὰρ ὁ νῦν σοι καταφρονούμενος, ἦν ὅτε καὶ
ὑπὲρ σὲ ἦν· ὁ νῦν ἄνθρωπος καὶ ἀσύνθετος ἦν. ὃ μὲν ἦν,
διέμεινεν· ὃ δὲ οὐκ ἦν, προσέλαβεν. ἐν ἀρχῇ ἦν ἀναιτίως· 2 χαμαιπετὲς] χαμερπὲς bef || 4 εναπομενης c 3. συνανιέναι θ.] ’to move upwards
— or perh. to grow up — with
’ The words do not necessarily
imply that θεότης ἄνεισι,
and there is no ref. to the Ascension. 4. ἐναπομένοις] Ἐναπομένειν is
‘to remain on, to remain to the end,
in.’ 5. φύσεως λόγος] ’what is the
law of His (true, Divine) Nature.’ 6. οἰκονομίας] of accommodation
to our circumstances. The word is
very freq. used by the fathers in
ref. to the Incarnation: see Suicer
s.υ., and Sophocles' Lexicon. 19. He was not always, what
He became for our sakes; and He
ever retained the nature which was
originally His. The words which
indicate His self-emptying are always
balanced by others which indicate His
divine glory. 7. καὶ ὑπὲρ σε] ‘even abpve you.’ 8. ὃ μὲν ἢν, διέμεινεν] Cp. Zeno
Ver. Serm. ii de Nat. saluo quod
erat, meditatur esse quod non erat.
St Austin plays upon the same formula
in many of his Christmas
sermons. See also Leo Serm. xxi
de Nat. Dei § 2. 9. ἀναιτίως] It appears like a
contradiction of what Gr. has said
in ξξ 3. 15. But the sentences
which follow shew that Gr. is thinking
here of αἰτία in the sense of a
final cause. 10. γέγονε] as in the N.T. = ἐγένετο. 12. διὰ μέ σου νοός] Cp. Or. ii 23
θεὸς σαρκὶ διὰ μέσης ψυχῆς ἀνεκράθη,
καὶ συνεδέθη τὰ διεστῶτα τῆ πρὸς
ἄμφω τοῦ μεσιτεύοντος οἰκειότητι. In
Or. xxxviii, after shewing in § 10
how creatures endowed with mind
have an affinity with God which
other creatm-es have not, Gr. says
in § 13 that the Eternal Word was
incarnate διὰ μέσης ψυχῆς νοερᾶς
μεσιτευούσης θεότητι καὶ σαρκὸς παχύτητι.
We cannot imagine an
’incarnation ’ of the Word in an
irrational thing. 19. 2 συνανεκράθη] συνεκράθη b || 4 γεγέννητο c || 9 ἐγίνετο e ||
10 ανεκλιθη] ἀνεκλήθη a: ἐτέθη b 1. γενόμενος Ἴ’., ὁ κάτω θεός]
‘was made man, the earthly God.’
Gr. is fond of dwelling upon the
intrinsic divinity of man. Cp. Or.
xxxviii 7 ἵνα...ὡς οἰκείοις ἤδη προσομιλῇ
. . . θεὸς ἑνούμενός τε καὶ
γνωριζόμενος. Here, the description
of man as ὁ κάτω θεός is prepared
for by the words διὰ μέσου νοός. 2. συνανεκράθη θεῶ Cp. iv 2
ἐχρίσθη θεότητι; iv 3 θεῷ πλακῆναι
καἰ γεμέσθαι θεὸν ἐκ τῆς μίξεως. The
language, if pressed, would imply
that Christ was a human person,
taken into union with a divine one.
This would, of course, be erroneous,
and Gr. 's own words immediately
before shew that he perfectly understood
the Person of our Lord to be
divine first, and then by condescension
human. Prob. the nom. to
συνανεκράθη is strictly supplied from
ἄνθρωπος, ὁ κ. θεός, not from ὁ νῦν σοι
καταφρονούμενος. The humanity of
Christ undoubtedly συνανεκρ. θεῷ.
Put the humanity of Christ, impersonal
except by virtue of His assumption
of it, is not exactly described
by the term ἄνθρωπος. The
rise of Nestorianism, which was
after Gr.'s time, would have suggesed
more careful phraseology;
and it may be added that a fear of
the still later Eutychianism might
have made Gr. modify the words
συνανεκράθη and τοῦ κρείττονος ἐκνικησαντος. 3. ἵνα γένωμαι] It is perh. somewhat
νεανικόν to speak of our becoming
Gods ‘to the same extent’
as Christ is man; but doubtless Gr.
would explain that he spoke of men
in proportion to heir capacity; or
perh., in view of what follows,
τοσοῦτον means ’as truly.’ He
uses the same phrase in Or. xl
45. 4. ἐγεψννητο] ‘He had been begotten
before,’ i.e. eternally. 7. ὅλον τοῦτο] both the ἀπάτωρ
ἐντ’. and the ἀμήτωρ ἐκ. ib. ἐγνώσθη προφ.] Luke i 41. 9. ἀποσπαργανοῦται τὰ τῆς τ.]
Luke xxiv 12, John xx 6 f. 11. ὐπ’ ἀγγ. ἐδοξάσθη] Luke ii
9 f.  Ἐβαπτίσθη μὲν ὡς ἄνθρωπος, ἀλλ’ ἁμαρτίας
ἔλυσεν ὡς θεός· οὐ καθαρσίων αὐτὸς δεόμενος, ἀλλ’ ἵνα
ἁγιάσῃ τὰ ὕδατα. ἐπειράσθη ὡς ἄνθρωπος, ἀλλ’ ἐνίκησεν
ὡς θεός· ἀλλὰ θαρρεῖν διακελεύεται, ὡς κόσμον νενικηκώς. 1 ἐφυγάδευσε be: φυγαδευσε g 20. 7 om οὐ καθαρσίων αὐτὸς δεομενος
ce || 14 ἐβαρήθη] ἐβαρύνθη cef 1. φυγαδεύει τὰ Αἶγ’.] The ref.
is to the legend that the idols of
Egypt were broken at His entrance
into the land; which legend connected
itself with such passages as
Is. xix 16 f., Jer. xlvi 25. ib. οὐκ εἶχεν εἶδ’.] Is. liii 2. 2. ὡραῖος] Ps. xliv 3 (xlv 2). 3. ἐπὶ τοῦ ὄρους] Matt, xvii 2,
Luke ix 29. 4. τὸ μέλλον μυστ] ‘revealing
the secret of the future.’ Prob. to
the three Apostles, — the future being
His own future. 6. ἁμαρτίας ἔλυσεν] Matt, ix 2
etc. It is, of course, not ὡς θεός that
our Lord there claims to forgive sins. 7. ἵνα ἁγιάσῃ τὰ ὔ.] Cp. the i
first prayer in the Baptismal Office. 9. κόσμον νενικ.] John xvi 33. 10. ἄρτος ἐστι] John vi 51. 11. ἐάν τις διψῶ John vii 37. 12. πηγάζειν] ‘give forth water
like a fountain,’ John vii 38. 14. ἀνάπαυσις] Matt, xi 28. 15. ἐπὶ π. κουφίζεται] Matt, xiv
25 f. ib. ἔπιτ’. πνεύμασιν] Matt, viii
26. 16. βαπτιζόμενον] a classical sense
of the word. 17. ἐξ ἰχθύος] Matt, xvii 27. id. Σαμαρείτης] John viii 48. 18. τὸν ἀπὸ ‘Ι. καταβ.] Luke χ
30; ‘the Good Samaritan.’ 19. ὑπὸ δαιμ. ἐπιγινώσκεται] Mark
i 24, 34 etc. 1 λεγεῶνας df || 5 που] + τέθειται bdfg Ἴ’ 7 κοσμον] ’τον κ. eg ΙΙ 12 μεμαλακισταδ]
+ καὶ bdefg 1. λεγεῶνα] Mark v 9 etc. 2. ὡς ἀστραπήν] Luke χ 18. 3. λιθάζεται, ἀλλ’ οὐχ ἁ.] John
viii 59. 4. ἐπακούει] Matt, viii 3 etc. ib. παύει δάκρυον] Luke vii 13. 5. ἐρωτιᾷ που] John xi 34. Cp.
the discussion in Ath. Or. iii c. Ar.
ἑ37, 38- See also μ’ Deer. Nic. §14.
Ath. decides in favour of supposing
that our Lord knew the answer before
asking the question; but he
admits the possibility of the view
adopted by Gr. Ἃν δὲ φιλονεικῶσιν
ἔτι διὰ τὸ ἐπερωτᾶν, ἀκουέτωσαν,
ἐν μὲν τῆ θεότητι οὐκ ἐστιν ἄγνοια,
τῆς δὲ σαρκὸς ἴδιόν ἐστι τὸ ἂγ νοεῖν. 7. ἐξαγοράζει] 1 Cor. vi 20, vii
23; cp. 1 Pet. i 19. 8. πρόβατον] Is. liii 7. 9. ποιμαίνει τ. ’I.] Ps. lxxix 2
(lxxx Ι). ib. νῦν δέ] Ps. ii 9, Rev.
xii 5. 10. ἀμνὸς ἄφ’.] Is. liii 7. ib. λόγος κτλ.] John i 1, 23. 12. μεμαλάκισται] Is liii 5. ib. θεραπεύει] Matt, ix 35. 14. τῷ ξύλω τῆς ζ] Rev. xxii 2
Gen. ii 9. 15. λῃστήν] Luke xxiii 43. ib. σκοτίζει] Matt, xxvii 45. 17. τὸ ὕδωρ] John ii 9. ib. τῆς πικρᾶς γ. κατ.] Εx. xv
25. 18. γλυκασμός] Cant. V 16. 19. ἐξουσίαν ἐχ.] John x 18.  ταῦτα τοῖς αἰνιγματισταῖς παρ’ ἡμῶν, οὐχ ἑκόντων 2 προεγείρονται] ἐγείρονται ‘Reg. Cypr.’ || 8 λύει] λυέτω f
21. 15 προβαλώμεθα c I. καταπ. ῥήγνυται] Matt, xxvii
51; cp. Heb. ix 8, x 19 f. 2. προεγείρονται] Matt, xxvii 52.
The reading ἐγ. is manifestly a cor-
rection, to bring Gr. into conformity
with St Μ. 3. ζωοποιεῖ] John v 21. ib. καταλύει] Heb. ii 14; cp.
2 Tim. i 10. 4. ἀνάγει ψυχάς] Α ref. to the
traditional belief of the "harrowing
of hell." Cp. Ign. Magn. 9 παρὼν
ἤγειρεν αὐτοὺς τοὺς προΦήτας) ἐκ
νεκρῶν, where see ’s note.
The doctrine was naturally a favourite
one among the speculative
sects; see Anaph. Pilati B 8 (Tisch.
p. 447). 21. It has been a disagreeable
task to examine these objections; believers
are not fond of arguing; but
it is important to shew that the
arguments are not all on the side of
heresy. To rely upon logic, however,
is the abandonment of faith, the
evacuation of the Gospel, and its
betrayal. God bring the opponents
to a better mind, and grant us a
saving hold upon the Trinity. 9. ταῦτα] sc εἰρήκαμεν or εἰρήσθω. 11. εἷς ἀντικείμενος] Satan. ib. τοὺς ἐμπίπτοντας] ‘our assailants.’ 13. ἀήττητοι τ. π. κτλ] κτλ.] ‘invincible
in those fine arguments.
which make void the Gospel.’ 15. προβαλλώμεθα] ’advance’ as
a sword or shield. ib. τὸ το̣ῦ πνεύματος ἀ̣ξ.] ’defeat
the credentials of the Spirit by our
contentions.’ 6 στραγγαλιας] + τῶν a || δογμάτων] συναλλαγμάτων b || 7 ποιήσειε]
ποιήσει a || 9 παρακαλοῦμεν] + καὶ g ΙΙ 10 σβέννυται a || 12 ἔχοιτε] ἔχετε
’in nonnull.’ || 16 ’δοξα] + καὶ τὸ κράτος νυν καὶ ἀεὶ καὶ f 1. τὸ ἁ. τοῦ μ. φ] ‘the
weakness of the argument is held to
be the zveakness of our creed. 2. κένωσις τοῦ ’στ’] I Cor. i 17. 4. πλήρωσις] the opposite of κέ
νῶσις. It is the ‘fulfilling of the
word’ even when the λόγος is feeble. ib. ἀναγγέλλων . . . κρατούμενα]
Dan. v 16. Seeiill. 6. στραγγαλιάς] ’ tightly twisted
knots’; a quotation from Is. lviii
with δογμάτων substituted for συναλλαγμάτων. 8. ὀνομάζονται] sc. Εὐνομιανοί. 9. δεόμεθα ὁ. X.] 2 Cor. v 20. 10. τὸ πνεῦμα μὴ σβ.] 1 Thess.
v 19. 14. εἰλικρ. κ. ἀπρóσκ.] Phil, i 10.