Ἐπειδὴ ἀνεκαθήραμεν τῷ λόγῳ τὸν θεόλογον, οἷόν
τε εἶναι χρὴ διελθόντες, καὶ οἷστισι φιλοσοφητέον, καὶ
ἡνίκα, καὶ ὅσον·—ὅτι ὡς οἷόν τε καθαροῖς, ἵνα φωτὶ καταλαμβάνηται
φῶς· καὶ τοῖς ἐπιμελεστέροις, ἵνα μὴ ἄγονος
ἦ εἰς ἄγονον χώραν ἐμπίπτων ὁ λόγος· καὶ ὅταν γαλήνην

ἔχωμεν ἔνδον ἀπὸ τῆς ἔξω περιφορᾶς, ὥστε μή, καθάπερ
οἱ λυττῶντες, τῷ πνεύματι διακόπτεσθαι· καὶ ὅσον ἐχωρήσαμεν,
ἢ χωρούμεθα· —ἐπειδὴ ταῦτα οὕτω, καὶ ἐνεώσαμεν
ἑαυτοῖς θεῖα νεώματα, ὥστε μὴ σπείρειν ἐπ’ ἀκάνθαις, καὶ
τὸ πρόσωπον τῆς γῆς ὡμαλίσαμεν, τῆ γραφῇ τυπωθέντες

τε καὶ τυπώσαντες· φέρε, τοῖς τῆς θεολογίας ἤδη προσβῶμεν
λόγοις, προστησάμενοι τοῦ λόγου τὸν πατέρα, καὶ

1. 1 ἐπειδὴ] ἔπει ’δε be ’Or. I’ || 3 καθαροῖς] -ον d1 || 7
be: λύζοντες d2 ǁ 8 ἐπειδὴ] ἔπει ’δε ef || 11 τοις τῆς θεολ.] om τῆς d:
ομ τῆς θεολ. c1


1. Having spoken of the conditions
under which theological subjects
jects should be treated, we proceed to
our theological enquiry itself, invoking
the assistance of the Trinity.


1. ἀνεκαθήραμεν] lit. ’cleaned up’;
a ref. to the passage of Plato quoted
above p. 11.


3. φωτὶ καταλαμβάνηται φῶς] cf.
John i 5; but Gr.'s interpretation of
his text is a very doubtful one.


4. ἐπιμελεστέροις] ‘among thougthful
men,’ Ἄγονος=ἄκαρπος Mark iv
19.


6. περιφορᾶς] cf. Oral, in Ful. 1
§ 100 πλοῦτον, εὐκλείαν, εὐκλείαν,
δυναστείαν, ἃ τῆς κάτω περιφορᾶς of Gr. 's.
ἐστὶ καὶ ὀνειρώδους τέρψεως. Hesych.
renders the word by ἢ κατὰ
κίνησις—‘whirl.’ Cp. Plat. Rep. 10
p. 616; Eccl. ii 2.


7. τῷ πνεῦμ’. διακόπτεσθαι] ‘be
stopped for want of breath.’


ib. ἐχωρήσαμεν, ἢ χωρούμεθα] Our
limits are fixed by our own capacity
and by that of those whom we address.


8. ἐνεώσαμεν...ἀκάνθαις] Jer. iv 3.


10. τὸ πρόσ’. τ. γ. ὡμαλίσαμεν]
Is. xxviii 25.


12 προστησάμενοι τ. λ.] ’making
God the προστάτης, or patron, of
the ’;—a favourite expression
of Gr's.




τὸν υἱόν, καὶ τὸ πνεῦμα τὸ ἅγιον, περὶ ὧν ὁ λόγος, ὥστε
τὸν μὲν εὐδοκεῖν, τὸν δὲ συνεργεῖν, τὸ δὲ ἐμπνεῖν· μᾶλλον
δὲ μίαν ἐκ τῆς μιᾶς θεότητος γενέσθαι τὴν ἔλλαμψιν
ἑνικῶς διαιρουμένην, καὶ συναπτομένην διαιρέτως, ὃ καὶ

παράδοξον.

 

Ἀνιόντι δέ μοι προθύμως ἐπὶ τὸ ὄρος, ἢ τό γε
ἀληθέστερον εἰπεῖν, προθυμουμένῳ τε ἅμα καὶ ἀγωνιῶντι,
τὸ μὲν διὰ τὴν ἐλπίδα, τὸ δὲ διὰ τὴν ἀσθένειαν, ἵνα τῆς
νεφέλης εἴσω γένωμαι, καὶ θεῷ συγγένωμαι τοῦτο γὰρ

κελεύει θεός), εἰ μέν τις Ἀαρών, συνανίτω καὶ στηκέτω
πλησίον, κἂν ἔξω μένειν τῆς νεφέλης δέῃ, τοῦτο δεχόμενος.
εἰ δέ τις Ναδάβ, ἢ Ἀβιούδ, ἢ τῆς γερουσίας, ἀνίτω μέν,
ἀλλὰ στηκέτω πόρρωθεν, κατὰ τὴν ἀξίαν τῆς καθάρσεως.
εἰ δέ τις τῶν πολλῶν καὶ ἀναξίων ὕψους τοιούτου καὶ

θεωρίας, εἰ μὲν ἄναγνος πάντῃ, μηδὲ προσίτω, οὐ γὰρ
ἀσφαλές· εἰ δὲ πρόσκαιρα γοῦν ἡγνισμένος, κάτω μενέτω,
καὶ μόνης ἀκουέτω τῆς φωνῆς καὶ τῆς σάλπιγγος, τῶν
ψιλῶν τῆς εὐσεβείας ῥημάτων· καπνιζόμενόν τε τὸ ὄρος
βλεπέτω καὶ καταστραπτόμενον, ἀπειλήν τε ὁμοῦ καὶ

θαῦμα τοῖς ἀνιέναι μὴ δυναμένοις. εἰ δέ τις θηρίον ἐστὶ

3 τῆς μιας] μιᾶς τῆς d 2. 8 ασθενειαν] ἀλήθειαν cd ’Or. I1’ ||
15 προσίτω οὐ γὰρ] προσιτετω οὐδὲ γὰρ ’Or. I’ ǁ 18 καπνιζόμενον τε] και
καπν. c: om τε e || 19 βλεπέτω] ’in nonnullis βλεπων’


4. ἑνικῶς ἑνικῶς κτλ.] ‘an illumination
which, though one, comes
in three different modes, and which,
though coming in different modes, is
united.’


2. Like Moses, Gr. is called up
the mountain to converse with
He invites his hearers to join
him as far as may be permitted, like
Aaron or the elders. ’Beasts’ are
warned away.


6. ἀνιόντι] Ex. xix 3 foil.


7. ἀγωνιῶντι] ‘filled with anxious
fear.’


8. ἵνα] depends upon ἀνιόντι.
τῆς νεφέλης Ex. xxiv 18.


10. Ἀαρών] Ex. xix 24.


11 τοῦτο] sc. ἔξω μένειν. Gr.
infrequently uses δέχεσθαι m tne
sense of ’accepting’’ a situation, i.e.
not rebelling against it.


12. Ναδάβ κτλ.] Ex. xxiv 1.


13. κ. τ. ἀξίαν τ. καθάρσεως] ‘acinto
cording to the degree of his purification.’
Cp. Ex. xix 22.


16. πρόσκαιρα γ. ἡγν.] Ex. xix
14, 15.


18. τ. φιλῶν τ. εὐσ. ῥημάτων] Cp.
Deut. iv 12 (Heb. xii 19). They
are to hear τὰ ψιλὰ ῥ’. as distinguished
from attempting to understand
depths of their meaning.


20. θη̣ρίον] Ex. xix 13. Cp. Greg.
Moral, vi 27 ’bestia montem tangit,
cum mens irrationabilibus desideriis
subdita ad contemplationis alta se
erigit: sed lapidibus percutitur, quia
summa non sustinens ipsis superni
ponderis ictibus necatur.’




πονηρὸν καὶ ἀνήμερον καὶ ἀνεπίδεκτον πάντῃ λόγων
θεωρίας καὶ θεολογίας, μὴ ἐμφωλευέτω ταῖς ὕλαις κακούργως
καὶ κακοηθῶς, ἵνα τινὸς λάβηται δόγματος ἢ ῥήματος,
ἀθρόως προσπηδῆσαν, καὶ σπαράξῃ τοὺς ὑγιαίνοντας λόγους
ταῖς ἐπηρείαις, ἀλλ’ ἔτι πόρρωθεν στηκέτω, καὶ ἀποχωρείτω

τοῦ ὄρους, ἢ λιθοβοληθήσεται, καὶ συντριβήσεται, καὶ
ἀπολεῖται κακῶς κακός· λίθοι γὰρ τοῖς θηριώδεσιν οἱ
ἀληθεῖς λόγοι καὶ στερροί. εἴτε πάρδαλις εἴη, συναποθνησκέτω
τοῖς ποικίλμασιν· εἴτε λέων ἁρπάζων καὶ ὠρυόμενος
καὶ ζητῶν ἥντινα βρῶσιν ποιήσεται τῶν ἡμετέρων

ψυχῶν ἢ λέξεων· εἴτε σῦς καταπατῶν τοὺς καλούς τε καὶ
διαυγεῖς μαργαρίτας τῆς ἀληθείας· εἴτε λύκος Ἀραβικὸς
καὶ ἀλλόφυλος, ἢ καὶ τούτων ὀξύτερος τοῖς σοφίσμασιν·
εἴτε ἀλώπηξ, δολερά τις ψυχὴ καὶ ἄπιστος, καὶ ἄλλοτε
ἄλλη, τοῖς καιροῖς καὶ ταῖς χρείαις συμμορφουμένη, ἢν

νεκρὰ τρέφει καὶ ὀδωδότα σώματα, ἢ ἀμπελῶνες μικροί,

1 om ἀνήμερον καὶ e ǁ 3 ῥήματος η δόγματος f || 7 κακὸς κάκως c ||
10 ποιήσεται] -σηται d


1. ἀνεπίδεκτον π. λόγων θ. κ. θ.]
‘altogether incapable of taking in the
words of contemplation and theology,’
2. μὴ ἐμφωλευέτω] from φωλεός
‘a den’; ‘let him not lurk in the
’ which Gr. imagines to clothe
the base of the hill.


4. ἀθρόως] ’all at once’; explained
by Suid. = ταχέχως: otherwise it would
be in accordance with the etymology
to understand it of the animal gathering
itself up for the spring. Cp.
§ 21.


ib. τ. ὑγιαίν. λόγους] 1 Tim. vi 3,
2 Tim. i 13.


5. ταῖς ἐπηρείαις] ‘abuse’; cp.
ἐπηρεάζομεν above i 6.


ib. ἔτι πόρρωθεν] a kind of com-
parative= πορρωτέρω. Cp. v 5 μικρὸν
ἄνωθεν.


8. στερροί] Cp. above i 3.


9. τοῖς ποικίλμασιν] Jer. xiii 23.


ib. λέων...ὠρυόμενος] 1 Pet. v 8.


11. σῦς καταπατῶν] Matt, vii 6.


12. λύκος Ἀραβικός] Hab. i 8
(LXX.); cp. Zeph. iii 3. The words
κ. ἀλλόφυλος (i.e. ‘or Philistine’)
seem to be added to emphasize
mystic interpretation of Ἀραβικός.


15. τοῖς καιροῖς κ. τ. χρείαις συμμ.]
‘shifting shape according to opportunities
and necessities.’


16. ἀμπελῶνες μ] Cant, ii 15
ἀλώπεκας μικροὺς ἀφανίζοντας ἀμπελῶνας.
Gr. joins μικροὺς with ἀμπ.
instead of ἀλώπ., understanding the
sentence to denote the meanness of
the ‘foxes’ (i.e. jackals), which did
not venture to attack the large vineyeards,
and spoiled the small ones
instead.




τῶν μεγάλων διαπεφευγότων· εἴτε τι ἄλλο τῶν ὠμοβόρων,
καὶ ἀποβλήτων τῷ νόμῳ, καὶ οὐ καθαρῶν εἰς βρῶσίν τε
καὶ ἀπόλαυσιν. βούλεται γὰρ τούτων ἀπ’ ἀποχωρήσας ὁ
λόγος οὕτω πλαξὶ στερραῖς καὶ λιθίναις ἐγγράφεσθαι, καὶ

ταύταις ἀμφοτέρωθεν, διά τε τὸ φαινόμενον τοῦ νόμου καὶ
τὸ κρυπτόμενον· τὸ μὲν τοῖς πολλοῖς καὶ κάτω μένουσι,
τὸ δὲ τοῖς ὀλίγοις καὶ ἄνω φθάνουσιν.

 

Τί τοῦτο ἔπαθον, ὦ φίλοι καὶ μύσται καὶ τῆς
ἀληθείας συνερασταί; ἔτρεχον μὲν ὡς θεὸν καταληψόμενος,

μένος, καὶ οὕτως ἀνῆλθον ἐπὶ τὸ ὄρος, καὶ τὴν νεφέλην
διέσχον, εἴσω γενόμενος ἀπὸ τῆς ὕλης καὶ τῶν ὑλικῶν, καὶ
εἰς ἐμαυτὸν ὡς οἷόν τε συστραφείς. ῥαφείς. ἐπεὶ δὲ προσέβλεψα,
μόλις εἶδον θεοῦ τὰ ὀπίσθια· καὶ τοῦτο τῆ πέτρᾳ σκεπασθείς,

3. 8 om μύσται καὶ d || 9 ἔτρεχον] εἶχον ac ‘ Reg. a tres Colb. Or. I ’ ǁ
10 ἀνῆλθον] ἀπῆλθον e


1. ὠμοβόρων] = ὠμηστής ‘devouring
raw flesh,’ The Law does
expressly forbid the eating of such
animals on that ground; but it appears
to be the reason for the prohibition
of most of the birds enumerated
in Lev. xi, Deut. xiv.


4. οὕτω] resumes the preceding
clause—like sic demum; ’not
it has got rid of these.’


ib. πλαξὶ...λιθίναις] Ex. xxiv 12.
Α somewhat difficult turn in the
application of the narrative. Gr.,
or rather his λόγος as identified with
him, has ascended the mountain,
with a view to having impressed upon
him, or upon it, the teaching of God,
as the Commandments were upon
the tables of stone. The epithets
στερραῖς κ. θ. are intended to convey
the thought of something —
no transient impression.


5. ἀμφοτέρωθεν] Ex. xxxii 15.
Again a somewhat fantastic application.
One side of the tables is
seen—one part of the λόγος is
—by every one; but there is a
reverse which only few can read,
viz. those who succeed in reaching
the mountain top φθάνουσιν). This
use of φθάνειν is familiar in the
Ν. T.


3. When he has reached the appointed
spot, he can only see the ‘back
parts’ of God.


8. μύσται] Those who are initiated
into the mysteries.


9. καταληψόμενος] ‘as if I were
about to apprehend God.’


11. διέσχον] ‘penetrated’: cf. Horn.
Il. v 99 ἀντικρὺ δὲ διέσχε. Gr. uses
it § 31 of penetrating through the
veil of the Tabernacle.


ib. ὕλης] ’matter.’


12. συστραφείς] ‘having gathered
myself up’: cp. Plat. Rep. 1 p. 336
συστρέψας ἑαυτὸν ὥσπερ θηρίον ἧκεν
ἐφ’ ἡμᾶς.


13. τὰ ὀπίσθια] Ex. xxxiii 23.


ib. τῇ πέτρᾳ σκεπασθείς] Ex.
xxxiii 23 σκ. τῇ χειρί μου. This interpretation
of the ‘ cleft in the rock,’
made familiar to Englishmen by
’s hymn, is very ancient.
Cp. Iren. IV xx 9 ‘uidebit...in altitudine
petrae, hoc est, in eo qui est
secundum hominem eius aduentu,’
The Incarnation gives an assured
point from which we may observe
and study God, without being overwelmed
by the greatness of the
revelation. The glories of the Divine
Nature are tempered for us, as it
were, by the Human Life which
encompasses us as we look out from
it to the Divine. By the Incarnation,
our field of contemplation is at once
restricted and made clear.




τῷ σαρκωθέντι δι’ ἡμᾶς θεῷ Λόγῳ· καὶ μικρὸν διακύψας,
οὐ τὴν πρώτην τε καὶ ἀκήρατον φύσιν, καὶ ἑαυτῇ, λέγω δὴ
τῆ τριάδι, γινωσκομένην, καὶ ὅση τοῦ πρώτου καταπετάσματος
εἴσω μένει καὶ ὑπὸ τῶν Χερουβὶμ συγκαλύπτεται,
ἀλλ’ ὅση τελευταία καὶ εἰς ἡμᾶς φθάνουσα. ἡ δέ ἐστιν,

ὅσα ἐμὲ γινώσκειν, ἡ ἐν τοῖς κτίσμασι καὶ τοῖς ὑπ’ αὐτοῦ
προβεβλημένοις καὶ διοικουμένοις μεγαλειότης, ἤ, ὡς ὁ
θεῖος Δαβὶδ ὀνομάζει, μεγαλοπρέπεια. ταῦτα γὰρ θεοῦ
τὰ ὀπίσθια, ὅσα μετ’ ἐκεῖνον ἐκείνου γνωρίσματα, ὥσπερ
αἱ καθ’ ὑδάτων ἡλίου σκιαὶ καὶ εἰκόνες ταῖς σαθραῖς ὄψεσι


1 om θέω acd ǁ 6 ὅσα] ὡς ‘Reg. a’


1. διακύψας] ‘peering through
the aperture,’ Εἶδον must be
again before φύσιν.


2. τὴν πρώτην] In ref. to Ex.
xxxiii 20 οὐ δυνήσῃ ἰδεῖν μου τὸ πρόσωπον.
Ἀκήρατος practically, if not
etymologically, = ἀκέραιος ‘pure,’
‘unmixed.’ Cp. Arist. de Mundo
ii 5 στοιχεῖον ἅκ. τε καὶ θεῖον. Gr.
adds λ. δ. τῇ τριάδι lest he should
suggest the Sabellian notion of a
self-conscious Nature distinct from
the Persons in whom it resides.


3. τ. πρώτου καταπ.] i.e. as reckoned
from the seat of the Divine
Presence, not as in Heb. ix 3 in the
order of human approach.


4. ὁ. τ. χερουβὶμ σηκ.] It seems
more natural to suppose that Gr.
refers to the Cherubim covering the
Mercy Seat (Ex. xxv 20 [19]), than
to the decoration of the veil (Ex.
xxvi 31). Cp. Ezek. xxviii 14, 16,
where, however, there is nothing in
most texts of the LXX. to represent
’covering.’


5. τελευταία] to recall τὰ ὀπίσθια.
Φθάνουσα as above.


id. ἢ δέ] Gr. does not of course
mean to distinguish sharply between
the πρώτη and τελευταία φύσις, as
if they were separate natures. He
means the expressed and unexpressed
parts or aspects of the same nature.
The danger of misunderstanding is
not felt in Greek, where words like
πρῶτος, μέσος and the like, are commonly
monly used in a partitive sense; e.g.
ὁ πρῶτος ποὺς ’the front of the foot.’


6. ὅσα ἐμὲ γινώσκειν] sc. πάρεστι.
ib. ὑπ’ αὐτοῦ] sc. τοῦ θεοῦ, to be
supplied from θεοῦ τὰ ὀπίσθια above.


8. μεγαλοπρέπεια] used of God
nine times in the Pss.; μεγαλειότης is
not. Prob. Gr. refers esp. to Ps.
viii 2 (1), ciii (civ) 1 (in some texts),
cx (cxi) 3, or cxliv (cxlv) 5, 12, where
the word is used in connexion with
God's works. Gr. prefers the word
because it expresses Dot the abstract
quality, like μεγαλειότης, but the impression
produced by its manifesta-
tion.


9. ὅσα μετ’ ἐκεῖνον ἐκ. γνωρ.] ‘all
the indications of Himself which He
has lift behind Him,’ Elias
pares Wisd. xiii 5.


10. σαθραῖς ὄψεσι] Cp. i 3.




παραδεικνῦσαι τὸν ἥλιον, ἐπεὶ μὴ αὐτὸν προσβλέπειν οἷόν
τε, τῷ ἀκραιφνεῖ τοῦ φωτὸς νικῶντα τὴν αἴσθησιν. οὕτως
οὖν θεολογήσεις, κἂν ἦς Μωυσῆς καὶ Φαραὼ θεός, κἂν
μέχρι τρίτου κατὰ τὸν Παῦλον οὐρανοῦ φθάσῃς, καὶ

ἀκούσῃς ἄρρητα ῥήματα· κἂν ὑπὲρ ἐκεῖνον γένη, ἀγγελικῆς
τινὸς ἢ ἀρχαγγελικῆς στάσεως τε καὶ τάξεως ἠξιωμένος.
κἂν γὰρ οὐράνιον ἅπαν, κἂν ὑπερουράνιόν τι, καὶ πολὺ τὴν
φύσιν ὑψηλότερον ἡμῶν ἦ, καὶ ἐγγυτέρω θεοῦ, πλέον
ἀπέχει θεοῦ καὶ τῆς τελείας καταλήψεως, ἢ ὅσον ἡμῶν

ὑπεραίρει τοῦ συνθέτου καὶ ταπεινοῦ καὶ κάτω βρίθοντος
κράματος.

 

Ἀρκτέον οὖν οὕτω πάλιν. θεὸν νοῆσαι μὲν
χαλεπόν· φράσαι δὲ ἀδύνατον, ὥς τις τῶν παρ’ Ἕλλησι
θεολόγων ἐφιλοσόφησεν,—οὐκ ἀτέχνως ἐμοὶ δοκεῖν, ἵνα καὶ

κατειληφέναι δόξη τῷ χαλεπὸν εἰπεῖν, καὶ διαφύγῃ τῷ
ἀνεκφράστῳ τὸν ἔλεγχον. ἀλλὰ φράσαι μὲν ἀδύνατον, ὡς
ὁ ἐμὸς λόγος, νοῆσαι δὲ ἀδυνατώτερον. τὸ μὲν γὰρ νοηθὲν

1 προσβλέπειν] βλέπειν ‘Reg. a’ || 3 Φαραω] του Φ. bdef ǁ 4
κατα τον Παυλον bef ǁ 5 ἐκεῖνον] -νους bef || 6 om ἠξιωμένος ac || 7 καν
γαρ] om γὰρ a ǁ om τι e || 8 om ἤμων d || η καὶ] ἢ om καὶ f 4. 14 ἴνα
καὶ] ἴνα τὸ b || 15 τὼ χαλεπὸν] τὸ χαλ. bd: τὼ suprascr. c || 16 om μεν c


2. ἀκραιφνεῖ]=ἀκεραίῳ ‘unmitigated,’
‘untempered.’


3. Φαραὼ θεός] Ex. vii 1.


4. κατὰ τὸν Παῦλον] 2 Cor. xii
2. Φθάσῃς as above.


10. ὑπεραίρει] used intransitively
from Aristotle downwards.


ib. κάτω βρίθοντος κρ.] Wisd. ix
15. For κράματος see i 7.


4. To form an adequate con-
ception of God is even more impossible
than to express it when formed. It
is doubtful whether even angels can
do it.


12. ἀρκτέον] from ἄρχεσθαι: ‘we
must begin ’ The hopes with
which he had begun at first ὡς θεὸν
καταληψόμενος) have proved fallacious.


13. ὥς τις τῶν παρ᾿ Ἕ. θεολόγων]
The reference appears to be to
Timaeus 28 Ε τὸν μὲν οὖν ποιητὴν
καὶ πατέρα τοῦ παντὸς εὑρεῖν τὸ ἔργον,
καὶ εὕροντα εἰς πάντας ἀδύνατον λέγειν.
No approval is conveyed by the expression
θεολόγων τις. Cp. v 16.


14. οὐκ ἀτέχνως] Plato thus art-
fully insinuates, in Gr.'s opinion,
that he has himself apprehended
what he says is so difficult to appre
hend, and at the same time escapes
exposure by saying that it is inexpressible
τῷ (ἀνεκφρ.).


17. ἀδυνατώτερον] because if only
the conception could be formed, expression
would be comparatively
easy. Cp. Novatian de Trin. § 4
nomen Dei edici non potest, quolacious.
niam non potest nee concipi.




τάχα ἂν λόγος δηλώσειεν, εἰ καὶ μὴ μετρίως, ἁλλ’ ἀμυδρῶς
γε, τῷ μὴ πάντη τὰ ὦτα διεφθαρμένῳ καὶ νωθρῷ τὴν
διάνοιαν. τὸ δὲ τοσοῦτον πρᾶγμα τῇ διανοίᾳ περιλαβεῖν
πάντως ἀδύνατον καὶ ἀμήχανον, μὴ ὅτι τοῖς καταβεβλακευμένοις,
καὶ κάτω νεύουσιν, ἀλλὰ καὶ τοῖς λίαν ὑψηλοῖς

τε καὶ φιλοθέοις, καὶ ὁμοίως πάσῃ γεννητῇ φύσει, καὶ οἷς
ὁ ζόφος οὗτος ἐπιπροσθεῖ καὶ τὸ παχὺ τοῦτο σαρκίον
πρὸς τὴν τοῦ ἀληθοῦς κατανόησιν. οὐκ οἶδα δέ, εἰ μὴ καὶ
ταῖς ἀνωτέρω καὶ νοεραῖς φύσεσιν, αἳ διὰ τὸ πλησίον εἶναι
θεοῦ, καὶ ὅλῳ τῷ φωτὶ καταλάμπεσθαι, τυχὸν ἂν καὶ

τρανοῖντο, εἰ καὶ μὴ πάντη, ἀλλ’ ἡμῶν γε τελεώτερόν τε
καὶ ἐκτυπώτερον, καὶ ἄλλων ἄλλαι πλεῖον ἢ ἔλαττον,
κατὰ τὴν ἀναλογίαν τῆς τάξεως.

 

Τοῦτο μὲν οὖν ἐνταῦθα κείσθω· τὸ δὲ ἡμέτερον,

1 τάχα ἀν’] + καὶ e ǁ 4 καταβεβλακευμενοις] κατεβλ. acf ‘duo Colb. Or. 1’ ||
6 γεννητὴ] γενητὴ abc || 11 p, τε c


1. εἰ καὶ μὴ μ., ἀλλ’ ἀμ’. γε] μετρίως
is here a word of approbation, ‘if
not satisfactorily, yet dimly at any
rate.’


4. μὴ ὅτι] ‘not to speak ’ cp.
§ 11. Καταβεβλ. from βλάξ, which
is thought to be a collateral form of
μαλακός, ‘slack,’ ‘enfeebled,’ ‘enervated.’


6. γεννητῇ] not= γενητὴ ‘created,’
for Gr. goes on to speak of the
higher created intelligences as a separate
class afterwards; but strictly
‘begotten’ or ‘born,’ i.e. existing under
physical conditions, the effect of
which is described in the following
clause.


7. ἐπιπροσθεῖ] The verb is formed
from the adv. ἐπίπροσθεν: ‘to be in
front of,’ so ‘get in the way of.’
Wyttenbach collects many instances
of its use in his note on Plut. de
Recta And. Ratione p. 41 C.


ib. σαρκίον] the diminutive ex-
presses depreciation.


8. πρός] ‘in reference to,’
it comes to a matter οf.’


ib. οὐκ οἴδα δέ, εἰ μὴ] of course indicates
Gr.’s opinion that it is impossible.
This was the general
opinion. Cp. Chrys. Horn, de Incomprehensibili
iii 1 τὸν ἀνεξιχνίαστον
ἀγγέλοις, τὸν ἀνεξερεύνητον ἀρχαγγέλοις,
τὸν ἀθέατον τοῖς σεραφίμ, τὸν
ἀκατανόητον τοῖς χερουβίμ, τὸν ἀόρατον
ἀρχαῖς καἰ ἐξουσίαις λαὶ δυνάμεσι καὶ
ἁπλῶς πάση τῇ κτίσει.


10. τυχὸν ἂν καὶ τρανοῖντο] Τρανόω,
a favourite word of Gr.'s, usually
= ‘to make plain’ (e.g. § 20).
as τρανός is sometimes used in the
more active sense of ‘clear,’ i.e. of
penetrating intelligence (e.g. Wisd.
vii 22), it seems best to understand
τρανοῖντο here in that way, ‘gifted
with insight and intelligence.’


12. ἐκτυπώτερον] ‘ more expressly,’
’distinctly.’


5. The works of God are beyond
our present comprehension, much
more Himself; we can only affirm
for certain that He exists.


14. κείσθω] ‘be dropped.’ He
not wish to pursue the question with
regard to the superior intelligences:
τὸ δὲ ἠμ’. ‘but as concerning us.’




οὐχ ἡ εἰρήνη τοῦ θεοῦ μόνον ὑπερέχει πάντα νοῦν καὶ
κατάληψιν, οὐδὲ ὅσα τοῖς δικαίοις ἐστὶν ἐν ἐπαγγελίαις
ἀποκείμενα, τὰ μήτε ὀφθαλμοῖς ὁρατά, μήτε ὠσὶν ἀκουστά,
μήτε διανοίᾳ θεωρητά, κατὰ μικρὸν γοῦν, οὐδὲ ἡ τῆς

κτίσεως ἀκριβὴς κατανόησις· καὶ γὰρ καὶ ταύτης πείσθητι
τὰς σκιὰς ἔχειν μόνον, ὅταν ἀκούσῃς· ὄψομαι τοὺς οὐρανούς,
ἔργα τῶν δακτύλων σου, σελήνην καὶ ἀστέρας, καὶ
τὸν ἐν αὐτοῖς πάγιον λόγον· ὡς οὐχὶ νῦν ὁρῶν, ὀψόμενος
δὲ ἔστιν ὅτε· ἀλλὰ πολὺ πρὸ τούτων ἡ ὑπὲρ ταῦτα, καὶ

ἐξ ἧς ταῦτα, φύσις ἄληπτός τε καὶ ἀπερίληπτος· λέγω δέ,
οὐχ ὅτι ἔστιν, ἀλλ’ ἥτις ἐστίν. οὐ γὰρ κενὸν τὸ κήρυγμα
ἡμῶν, οὐδὲ ματαία ἡ πίστις ἡμῶν, οὐδὲ τοῦτό ἐστιν ὃ
δογματίζομεν· μὴ πάλιν τὴν εὐγνωμοσύνην ἡμῶν ἀθείας
λάβῃς ἀρχὴν καὶ συκοφαντίας, καὶ κατεπαρθῇς ὡς ὁμολο-

5. 2 ἐν ἐπαγγελίαις ἐστιν d || 8 πάγιον] πανάγιον e || 10 om ταύτα φύσις
. . . .λεγω δε d


1. ὑπερέχει π. νοῦν] Phil, iv 7.


3."/> μήτε ὀφθ. ὁρατά κτλ.] 1 Cor.
ii 9. Gr. forgets, as most people do,
that St Paul adds ἡμῖν γὰρ ἀπεκάλυψεν
ὁ θ. διὰ τοῦ πνεύματος.


4. κατὰ μικρὸν γοῦν] Γοῦν corrects,
but limits the concession;
‘not contemplated by the mind—
well, only to small estent.’


6. τὰς σκιάς] ‘the outlines.’


ib. ὄψομαι κτλ.] Ps. viii 4 (3).


8. τ. ἐν αὐτ’. πάγιον λόγον] πάγιος
from the root of πήγνυμι, ‘firm,’
‘fixed’; ‘the well established order
that prevails among them.’
words are a paraphrase of ‘which
thou hast ordained.’


ib. ὀψόμενος δὲ ἐστιν ὅτε] Gr.
calls attention to the fact that the
Ps. uses the future, not the present.


9. ἢ ὑπὲρ τ....φύσις] ὑπερέχει
πάντα νοῦν. It is a little odd to say,
“note only the peace of God, but
God Himself, passeth understanding.’’
We might have expected,
‘If the peace of God passeth understanding,
much more God Himself.’’


10. ἄληπτός τε κ.ἀπερίλ.] ‘inapprehensible
as it is and incomprehensible.’


11 οὐχ ὅτι ἐστιν, ἁλλ’ ἥτις ἐστίν]
may be taken either with ἄληπτος
κ. ἀπερίληπτος, or with the main
verb ὑπερέχει π. νοῦν. Perh. the
latter is the more forcible: ‘Ι do
not mean that the fact of its existence
passes understanding, but the
nature of it.’


ib. οὐ γὰρ κενόν κτλ.] 1 Cor.
xv 14, 17. The γὰρ implies that it
would be ‘vain’ if we were unable
truly to apprehend the fact of God's
existence.


13. ὃ δογματίζομεν] ‘nor is that
the doctrine which I am laying
down.’


ib. εὐγνωμοσύνην] Cp. εὐγνώμονος
above, i 5. It resembles ἐπιείκεια,
‘reasonableness.’ Μὴ πάλιν,
cp. i 4 μὴ πάλιν ἐπιφυέσθωσαν.


14. κατεπαρθῇς] ‘exalt yourself
against me.’ Cp. Cyr. Al. c. Ful. i
p. 6.




γούντων τὴν ἄγνοιαν. πλεῖστον γὰρ διαφέρει τοῦ εἶναί τι
πεπεῖσθαι τὸ τί ποτέ ἐστι τοῦτο εἰδέναι.

 

τοῦ μὲν γὰρ εἶναι θεόν, καὶ τὴν πάντων ποιητικήν
τε καὶ συνεκτικὴν αἰτίαν, καὶ ὄψις διδάσκαλος, καὶ ὁ
φυσικὸς νόμος· ἡ μὲν τοῖς ὁρωμένοις προσβάλλουσα, καὶ

πεπηγόσι καλῶς καὶ ὁδεύουσι, καὶ ἀκινήτως, ἵνα οὕτως
εἴπω, κινουμένοις καὶ φερομένοις· ὁ δὲ διὰ τῶν ὁρωμένων
καὶ τεταγμένων τὸν ἀρχηγὸν τούτων συλλογιζόμενος.
πῶς γὰρ ἂν καὶ ὑπέστη τόδε τὸ πᾶν, ἢ συνέστη, μὴ θεοῦ
τὰ πάντα καὶ οὐσιώσαντος καὶ συνέχοντος; οὐδὲ γὰρ

κιθάραν τις ὁρῶν κάλλιστα ἠσκημένην καὶ τὴν ταύτης
εὐαρμοστίαν καὶ εὐταξίαν, ἢ τῆς κιθαρῳδίας αὐτῆς ἀκούων,
ἄλλο τι ἢ τὸν τῆς κιθάρας δημιουργὸν καὶ τὸν κιθαρῳδὸν
ἐννοήσει, καὶ πρὸς αὐτὸν ἀναδραμεῖται τῆ διανοίᾳ, κἂν
ἀγνοῶν τύχη ταῖς ὄψεσιν. οὕτω καὶ ἡμῖν τὸ ποιητικὸν


6. 4 αἰτίαν] οὐσίαν f ǁ 6 ὁδεύουσι] -σα c


6. Of His existence the order of 
nature assures us. We are forced to
think of a Creator when we look
upon Creation, as the sight of a lyre
makes us think of the lyre-maker.
But beyond that, we have no certainty.


4. συνεκτικήν] from συνέχειν, Δ’
maintain in harmony’: cp. Col. i
τὰ πάντα ἐν αὐτῷ συνέστηκεν. So
Xen. Cyrop. 8 p. 140 οἱ θεοὶ] τὴν
τῶν ὅλων τήνδε τάξιν συνέχουσιν
ἀτριβῆ. For the construction, τὴν
π. π. αἰτίαν is strictly (with θεόν)
the subject of εἶναι. The def. art.
is used in the same way as in participial
sentences like εἰσὶν...οἱ τ. ἀκ.
προσκνώμενοι (above, p. 1); where
our idiom rather puts ’a’ than ‘the’;
‘that there is a God and a creative
cause.’


5. ὁ φυσικὸς νόμος] Gr. does not
here mean ‘natural law’ in
modern sense, although such an use
might readily be paralleled. The
explanatory clause below shews that
he does not mean ‘the law which
we observe in the natural order
around us,’ but the natural
upon ourselves of the observations
which we make. Cp.
below ταῖς φυσικαῖς ἀποδείξεσιν.


ib. προσβάλλουσα] ‘lighting upon.’


6. κ. πεπηγόσι] πέπηγα (from
πήγνυμι) has the intrans. sense, ‘to
be fixed.’ K. πεπ. κ. ὁδ’. κ. κιν. κ.
are predicates of τοῖς ὁρ.; ‘seeing
them fixed’ ect.


8. συλλογιζόμενος] When we see
the order in nature the natural
result upon ourselves is to infer the
existence of an ἀρχηγός i.e. ‘author.’


10. οὐσιώσαντος] οὐσιόω=‘to give
οὐσία,’ ‘bring into being.’


11. κιθάραν...κάιλιστα ἠσκημένην]
Cp. Paley's famous argument about
the watch. Ἀσκεῖν like ἐξασκεῖν, = 
exornare; see Horn. Od. i 439:
‘beautifully and elaborately made.’


15. ταῖς ὄψεσιν] contrasted with
τῆ διανοίᾳ: ‘he will pass ἀναδ. because
higher up, further back, in
the order of thought or causation)
to him in thought, although he may
not be acquainted with him by sight.’
The unusual pl. ταῖς ὄψ. might mean
either ‘by his (the player's) looks,’
or ‘by his (the hearer's) sight.’
latter makes the best parallel to
διαν.; it is also used in this sense by
Herodian 6 (9, 10) ὡς ἐν ὄψεσιν ἢν
’when he came in sight.’




δῆλον, καὶ τὸ κινοῦν καὶ τηροῦν τὰ πεποιημένα, κἂν μὴ
διανοίᾳ περιλαμβάνηται· καὶ λίαν ἀγνώμων ὁ μὴ μέχρι
τούτων προιὼν ἑκουσίως καὶ ταῖς φυσικαῖς ἑπόμενος ἀποδείξεσιν.
ἀλλ’ οὐδὲ τοῦτο εἶναι θεόν, ὅπερ ἐφαντάσθημεν,

ἢ ἀνετυπωσάμεθα, ἢ λόγος ὑπέγραψεν. εἰ δέ τις ἐν
περινοίᾳ τούτου ποτὲ κἂν ἐπὶ ποσὸν ἐγένετο, τίς ἡ ἀπόδειξις;
τίς οὕτως εἰς ἔσχατον σοφίας ἀφίκετο; τίς τοσούτου
χαρίσματος ἠξιώθη ποτέ; τίς οὕτω τὸ στόμα τῆς διανοίας

6 om ποτε ‘Or. 1’


1. τὸ ποιητ δῆλον] ‘the creating
power is plain.’


2. ἀγνώμων] here ‘unreasonable,’
‘deficient in sense.’


3. κ. ταῖς φ. ἐπ’. ἀποδ.] The καὶ
joins ἑπόμενος to ἑκουσίως, not to
προίων.


4. ἀλλ’ οὐδὲ τοῦτο] a very difficult
passage. The usual interpretation
makes ἀλλὰ answer to the μὴ
in μὴ προιών, ‘who will not go as far
as this, but (says) that not even this,
which we have imagined, is God.’
But it is harsh to supply the necessary
φάσκων or ὁμολογῶν in order to make
the clause grammatical; and a comparison
with the sentence in § 12
where Gr. resumes his thread after a
long digression, seems to shew that we
must assign an entirely different meaning
to the present sentence,—and
which will accord better with grammatical
requirements. In ἑ 12 Gr.
says that the proposition from which
he had started was τὸ μὴ ληπτὸν
εἶναι ἀνθρωπίνη διανοίᾳ τὸ θεῖον, μηδὲ
ὅλον ὅσον ἐστὶ φαντάζεσθαι. Here,
accordingly, we must suppose, that
it is Gr. himself, and not the λίαν
ἀγνώμων, who denies εἶναι θεὸν ὅπερ
ἔφαντ’. It is, he says, very unreasonable
not to accept the natural proofs
of God's existence, and in following
them we are compelled to form certain
great outlines of a conception
of God (e.g. creative power, rational
method, etc.), which we cannot
doubt to be correct. But even this
is not the same thing as to identify
εἶναι ὅπερ) God with what we have
imagined, or figured to ourselves,
or what our reason has delineated.
τοῦτο is the subject of ἐστὶν understood,
of which εἶναι θ. κτλ. is the
predicate. While we have ἀποδείξεις
for the one belief, we have none
for the other.


5. ὑπέγραψεν] Cp. I Pet. ii 21
ὑπογραμμόν ‘a sketch.’


6. ἐν περινοίᾳ τ....ἐγένετο] Gr.
uses the same expression in Or. xlv
§ 11: οὐ γὰρ οἶόν τε ἄλλως ἐν περινοίᾳ
θεοῦ γενέσθαι σώματος ὑλικοῦ καὶ
δεσμίου νοῦ πάχος μὴ βοηθούμενον.
The rare word περίνοια appears to
denote an embracing in thought, a
mental taking in of the subject.
Τούτου sc. θεοῦ ‘If ever anyone in
any degree has attained to an understanding
of Him, what proof is there
of the fact?’


8. τὸ στόμα...πνεῦμα] Ps. cxviii
(cxix) 131. The ἵνα ὥστε,
following as it does upon the οὕτως
and the τοσούτου.




ἤνοιξε καὶ εἵλκυσε πνεῦμα, ἵνα τῷ τὰ πάντα ἐρευνῶντι
καὶ γινώσκοντι καὶ τὰ βάθη τοῦ θεοῦ πνεύματι θεὸν
καταλάβῃ, καὶ μηκέτι τοῦ πρόσω δέηται, τὸ ἔσχατον
ὀρεκτὸν ἔχων ἤδη, καὶ εἰς ὃ πᾶσα σπεύδει καὶ πολιτεία
τοῦ ὑψηλοῦ καὶ διάνοια;

 

Τί γάρ ποτε ὑπολήψῃ τὸ θεῖον, εἴπερ ὅλαις ταῖς
λογικαῖς πιστεύεις ἐφόδοις; ἢ πρὸς τί σε ὁ λόγος ἀνάξει
βασανιζόμενος, ὦ φιλοσοφώτατε σὺ καὶ θεολογικώτατε
καὶ καυχώμενε εἰς τὰ ἄμετρα; πότερον σῶμα; καὶ πῶς
τὸ ἄπειρον, καὶ ἀόριστον, καὶ ἀσχημάτιστον, καὶ ἀναφές,

καὶ ἀόρατον; ἢ καὶ ταῦτα σώματα; τῆς ἐξουσίας· οὐ
γὰρ αὕτη φύσις σωμάτων. ἢ σῶμα μέν, οὐχὶ ταῦτα δέ;
τῆς παχύτητος· ἵνα μηδὲν πλέον ἡμῶν ἔχη τὸ θεῖον.
πῶς γὰρ σεπτόν, εἰ περιγραπτόν; ἢ πῶς φεύξεται τὸ ἐκ
στοιχείων συγκεῖσθαι καὶ εἰς αὐτὰ πάλιν ἀναλύεσθαι, ἢ


4 ορεκτον] -των e 7. 6 ὀλαῖς] ὅλως abde ‘Coisl. 3 Or. ’ ǁ 7 εφοδιες]
’Coisl. 1 ορμαις’ (perperam) || 11 σωματα]+ ω f || 12 αυτη] αὐτή ut vid cef ΙΙ
ταύτα δε] + ω f ΙΙ 15 om η cdef


1 τῷ τ. π. ἐρευνῶντι κτλ.] 1
Cor. ii 10.,


3. τοῦ πρόσω] ‘no longer needs
to advance.’


ib. τὸ ἔσχ. ὀρεκτόν] ‘ the ultimate
object of ’ The phrase comes
originally from Arist. Metaph. xii 7.


4. πολιτεία τ. ὑψηλοῦ] ‘all a
high-minded man's life.’


7. to begin with, God cannot be
corporeal; which would involve being
dissoluble.


6. ὅλαις τ. λου....ἐφόδοις] The
reading ὅλως (‘if you rely at all’)
would not make so strong an argu-
ment against Eunomian self-confidence.
Ἔφοδος ‘method.’


8. βασανιζόμενος] a logical pa-
rallel to ὅλαις;—‘however much you
rack it.’


9. καυχ. εἰς τὰ ἄμετρα] ‘boasting of
your command of the infinite.’


ib. σῶμα] of course, a very un-
likely alternative for the Eunomians
to choose; and it must be admitted
that Gr. somewhat begs the question
as against them, in the next clause.


ib. καἰ πῶς] sc. σῶμά ἐστιν (or ἄν
εἴη).


11. ἢ καἰ ταῦτα σ.] ‘Are bodies
to be so described?’


ib. τ. ἐξουσίας] ‘a stretch of
power,’ to confer such properties
upon a body!


12. σῶμα μέν, οὐχὶ τ. δέ] ‘Will
you make Him a body and drop
these attributes?’ This Gr.
terizes as ‘gross.’ For παχύτητος
cp. § 4 τὸ παχὺ τοῦτο σαρκίον.


13. ἵνα...ἔχῃ] B good example
that not ‘final’ use of ἴνα which is
familiar in the N.T.


14. σεπτόν] from σέβεσθαι, ‘an
object of devotion.’ Gr.
mean that the fact of being περιγραπτόν
would by itself preclude
being σεπτόν, but that all that is
connoted by περιγράπτῳ would.




καὶ ὅλως λύεσθαι; σύνθεσις γὰρ ἀρχὴ μάχης· μάχη δὲ
διαστάσεως· ἡ δὲ λύσεως· λύσις δὲ ἀλλότριον πάντῃ
θεοῦ καὶ τῆς πρώτης φύσεως. οὐκ οὖν διάστασις, ἵνα μὴ
λύσις· οὐδὲ μάχη, ἵνα μὴ διάστασις· οὐδὲ σύνθεσις, ἵνα

μὴ μάχη· διὰ τοῦτο οὐδὲ σῶμα, ἵνα μὴ σύνθεσις. ἐκ τῶν
τελευταίων ἐπὶ τὰ πρῶτα ὁ λόγος ἀνιὼν οὕτως ἵσταται.

 

Ἠὼς δὲ καὶ σωθήσεται τὸ διὰ πάντων διήκειν καὶ
πληροῦν τὰ πάντα θεόν, κατὰ τό· Οὐχὶ τὸν οὐρανὸν καὶ
τὴν γῆν ἐγὼ πληρῶ; λέγει κύριος, καί· Ηνεῦμα κυρίου

πεπλήρωκε τὴν οἰκουμένην, εἰ τὸ μὲν περιγράφοι, τὸ δὲ
περιγράφοιτο; ἢ γὰρ διὰ κενοῦ χωρήσει τοῦ παντός, καὶ
τὰ πάντα οἰχήσεται ἡμῖν, ἵν ὑβρισθῇ θεός, καὶ σῶμα
γενόμενος, καὶ οὐκ ἔχων ὅσα πεποίηκεν· ἢ σῶμα ἐν
σώμασιν ἔσται, ὅπερ ἀδύνατον· ἢ πλακήσεται καὶ ἀντι-

8. 10 περιγραφοι] φει ‘Reg. a’:μη περιγράφοιτο e || 13 om ἔχων e ǁ
14 και] η e


1. λύεσθαι] treated as something
further than ἀναλ. The component
elements might conceivably be separated
and yet something remain;
but λ. would be the complete break
up of the whole thing.


ib. σύνθεσις] The blending of
different elements introduces a possibility
of conflict, and so of division,
and so of destruction; which is unthinkable
in connexion with Him
who, if He exists at all, must be the
πρώτη φύσις, or primary existence,
into which no earlierexistence enters.
Elias observes that the ‘Platonic’
form of the argument is particularly
applicable to the heretical dialecticians
whom Gr. has in view.


5. ἐκ τῶν τελ.] In other words,
the contention that God is not ‘a
body’ is proved by a reductio
absurdum.


8. Besides, if God were corporeal,
His corporeity must involve either
the denial of all other corporeities, or
His interpenetration with them. Even
on the supposition of a ‘fifth element’
which might be identified with His
corporeity, He would be made subject
to motion and to space.


8. τὸ Οὐχί] Jer. xxiii 24.


9. πνεῦμα κ.] Wisd. i. 7. The
book is treated as authoritative.


10. τὸ μὲν...τὸ δέ] It seems logically
best, if grammatically less obvious,
to take τὸ μὲν as the direct
ace. after περιγράφοι and τὸ δὲ as
the indirect ace. after περιγράφοιτο;
‘if God should circumscribeonething
and be circumscribed with another.’
This, it is assumed, must be the
case if God were ‘a body.’


11. ἢ γάρ] as often, ‘for otherwise
either’etc.


ib. διὰ κενοῦ...τ. παντός] ‘the
universe which He pervades must
be empty.’


12. ἵν’ ὑβρισθῇ] an answer to the
implied rhetorical question, ‘And
why must everything perish?’
order that God may be doubly outraged,
by being made a body, and
by being deprived of all that He has
created.’


14. ἀδύνατον] because ‘bodies’
are mutually exclusive.




παρατεθήσεται, ὥσπερ ὅσα τῶν ὑγρῶν μίγνυται, καὶ τὸ
μὲν τέμνει, ὑπὸ δὲ τοῦ τμηθήσεται, ὃ καὶ τῶν Ἐπικουρείων
ἀτόμων ἀτοπώτερόν τε καὶ γραωδέστερον· καὶ οὕτω διαπεσεῖται
ἡμῖν, καὶ σῶμα οὐχ ἕξει, οὐδὲ πῆξίν τινα, ὁ περὶ
τοῦ σώματος λόγος. εἰ δὲ ἄυλον φήσομεν, εἰ μὲν τὸ

πέμπτον, ὥς τισιν ἔδοξε, καὶ τὴν κύκλῳ φορὰν φερόμενον,
ἔστω μὲν ἄυλόν τι καὶ πέμπτον σῶμα, εἰ βούλονται δέ,
καὶ ἀσώματον, κατὰ τὴν αὐτόνομον αὐτῶν τοῦ λόγου
φορὰν καὶ ἀνάπλασιν· οὐδὲν γὰρ νῦν περὶ τούτου διοίσομαι.

2 τέμνει] τέμει c || 3 γραωδέστερον] + ὡς οἱ πέρι ταύτα ἐσχολακότες εληρησαν
bde El ǁ 9 διοίσομαι] μεν ‘Reg. a’


ib. πλακήσεται κτλ.] πλακ. from
πλέκω ‘to weave,’ so ‘entangle,’
It is a somewhat strange
use of the simple verb; but Gr. has
elsewhere θεῷ πλακῆναι καἰ θεὸν
γενέσθαι ἐκ τῆς μίξεως. Ἀντιπ.
‘bring into juxtaposition.’
Gr. understands by the two words is
explained by the comparison with
mixing liquids.


1. τὸ μὲν τέμνει] sc. ὁ θεός; the
fut. τμηθ. shews that Gr. is no longer
thinking of the liquids, though no
doubt it was the comparison with
them which caused the pres. τέμνει.
The supposed interpenetration of the
σῶμα of God with other σώματα
necessitates constant breaches of
continuity in both.


2. Ἐπικ. ἀτόμων] Cp. p. 19
above.


3. γραωδέστερον] Cp. 1 Tim.
iv 7. The words which follow in
some authorities must be an ancient
gloss. If they belonged to the text
at all, they must needs come in after
τμηθήσεται, where (apparently) no
MS. places them.


ib. διαπεσεῖται] ‘fall through,’
‘come to ’; Plat. Phaed. 80 c.
The subject of διαπ. is ὁ π. τ σ.
λόγος.


4. σῶμα οὐχ νεῖ] It is difficult
in English to keep up the play on
the word σῶμα. Gr. means of course
that the argument for a corporeal
existence of God proves unsubstantail:
it has no πῆξιν, ‘solidity’ (cp.
πάγιος λόγος in § 5).


5. εἰ δὲ ἄυλον] ἁ priv. and ὕλη.
The protasis is broken up into εἰ μὲν
τὸ πέμπτον and εἰ δὲ ἄλλο τι παρὰ τὸ
πέμπτον. Then the first apodosis is
broken up likewise into ἒστω μέν
and κατὰ τί δέ.


ib τὸ πέμπτον] The reference
is to the Aristotelian conception of
a “quintessence,” or fifth “element,”
besides earth, air, fire and water.
Cp. Bas. Hex. 11.


7. ἔστω μέν] Gr. is willing to
assume for the moment that there is
such a thing as the imagined quintessence:
οὐδὲν νῦν διοίσομαι, ‘I will
not now differ.’


8. κατὰ τὴν αὐτόνομον κτλ.]
Almost each word here requires annotation.
Λόγος is ‘the σῶμα,’
or perhaps ἀσώματον σῶμα Φορὰν
at first sight seems to refer to τὴν
κύκλῳ φ. just above; but there is
prob. no such play upon the word
intended. Gr. seems to employ it
in the sense of ‘usage.’ Although
no other example of the subst. in
that sense is at hand, the verb is not
infrequently so used. Gr. has διὰ
γλώσσης φέρειν ‘to speak of.
Ἀναπλάττειν and its derivatives are
frequent in Gr. Sometimes the prep.
has its full force, ‘re-construction,’
‘fashioning afresh,’ as for ex.
baptism; sometimes it is simply ‘to
fashion,’ ‘imagine.’ Thus he
of matter ὕλην) as ὑποστᾶσαν ἐξ οὐκ
ὄντων, κἄν τινες ἀγέννητον ἀναπλάττωσιν.
So here he seems to mean
the ‘shaping’ which the Aristotelians
put upon the word, with a slight
suggestion of its being a factitious
and not the legitimate construction.
This is further expressed by calling
it αὐτόνομον, ‘their inderpendent,’
arbitrary, ‘use and construction of
the word.’




κατὰ τί δὲ τῶν κινουμένων ἔσται καὶ φερομένων, ἵνα μὴ
λέγω τὴν ὕβριν, εἰ τὰ αὐτὰ τοῖς πεποιημένοις ὁ πεποιηκὼς
κινηθήσεται, καὶ τοῖς φερομένοις ὁ φέρων, εἴ γε καὶ τοῦτο
δώσουσι; τί δὲ τὸ τοῦτο πάλιν κινοῦν; τί δὲ τὸ τὸ πᾶν

κινοῦν; κἀκεῖνο τί; καὶ τί πάλιν ἐκεῖνο; καὶ τοῦτο εἰς
ἄπειρον. πῶς δὲ οὐκ ἐν τόπῳ πάντως, εἴ γε φερόμενον;
εἰ δὲ ἄλλο τι παρὰ τὸ πέμπτον φήσουσιν, εἰ μὲν ἀγγελικόν,
πόθεν ὅτι ἄγγελοι σώματα, καὶ τίνα ταῦτα; καὶ πόσον
ὑπὲρ ἄγγελον εἴη θεός, οὗ λειτουργὸς ἄγγελος; εἰ δὲ

ὑπὲρ ταῦτα, πάλιν εἰσήχθη σωμάτων ἐσμὸς ἀλόγιστος,
καὶ φλυαρίας βυθός, οὐδαμοῦ στῆναι δυνάμενος.


3 καὶ τοῦτο om καὶ e ǁ 4 τὸ τὸ πὰν] τοῦτο τὸ πὰν b: τὸ πὰν aef || 8 οἱ
ἄγγελοι ‘Reg. a’ || αν e ποσον]+αν e ‘duo Colb. Or. 1’


1. κατὰ τί] Gr. seems to mean
’in what respect,’ ‘by virtue
what part of its being, will this
πέμπτον, which is identified with
the σῶμα of God, take its place
among the things which move and
revolve?’ It is, however, he
a ὕβρις, a wanton affront, to assign
such a place to God at all, whatever
may be the answer to his question.


4. δώσουσι] ‘will grant’:
sc. that God is ὁ φέρων.


ib. τί δὲ τὸ τοῦτο π. κινοῦν] τοῦτο
=τὸ πέμπτον: it (viz. God) moves
other things, and itself moves with
them; what then moves it? The τὸ
πᾶν which follows will then include
the thing which sets τὸ πέμπτον in
motion.


6. ἐν τόπῳ] Motion is a change
of space- relations, and therefore implies
a local position.


7. εἰ δὲ ἄλλο τι] The other alternative
(viz. that the σῶμα of God
is not the πέμπτον) is again confronted
with a dilemma; εἰ μὲν ἀγγελ.,
εἰ δὲ ὑπὲρ ταῦτα.


8. πόθεν ὅτι] ’xvhence comes the
belief ’ ’how do they know
that?’


ib. πδσον...εἴη] In better Greek
there would of course be an ἄν:
‘how far far would God excel an angel?


10. εἰσήχθη] The aor. gives a
liveliness to the argument: the logical
consequences are represented as
having taken actual effect; as in i 2.


id. ἐσμός] ‘a swarm,’ said to
derived from ἵημι. Ἀλόγιστος= ‘innumerable,’
though its possible sense
of ‘irrational’ may perh. have suggested
to Gr. the ’abyss of nonsense’
which follows. Στῆναι, ‘to stop.’
is not clear why the notion that
God's (supposed) σῶμα is superior to
angelic bodies should ‘again introduce
a countless swarm of bodies.
Perhaps by πάλιν. only means
that this notion is in that respect no
better than the former one, because
it also implies that the angels have
bodies. Otherwise he must mean
that the supposition of a body far
superior to angelic bodies leaves
room for the invention of swarms of
intermediate bodies between the angelic
bodies and it.




 

Οὕτω μὲν οὖν οὐ σῶμα ἡμῖν ὁ θεός. οὐδὲ γὰρ
ἤδη τις τοῦτο τῶν θεοπνεύστων ἢ εἶπεν ἢ παρεδέξατο,
οὐδὲ τῆς ἡμετέρας αὐλῆς ὁ λόγος. λείπεται δὴ ἀσώματον
ὑπολαμβάνειν. ἀλλ’ εἰ ἀσώματον, οὔπω μὲν οὐδὲ τοῦτο
τῆς οὐσίας παραστατικόν τε καὶ περιεκτικόν, ὥσπερ οὐδὲ

τὸ ἀγέννητον, καὶ τὸ ἄναρχον, καὶ τὸ ἀναλλοίωτον, καὶ τὸ
ἄφθαρτον, καὶ ὅσα περὶ θεοῦ ἢ περὶ θεὸν εἶναι λέγεται.
τί γὰρ ὄντι αὐτῷ κατὰ τὴν φύσιν καὶ τὴν ὑπόστασιν
ὑπάρχει τὸ μὴ ἀρχὴν ἔχειν, μηδὲ ἐξίστασθαι, μηδὲ περα-
τοῦσθαι ἀλλ᾿ ἀλλ’ ὅλον τὸ εἶναι περιλαμβάνειν λείπεται

προσφιλοσοφεῖν τε καὶ προσεξετάζειν τῷ γε νοῦν θεοῦ
ἀληθῶς ἔχοντι καὶ τελεωτέρῳ τὴν θεωρίαν. ὡς γὰρ οὐκ
ἀρκεῖ τὸ σῶμα εἰπεῖν, ἢ τὸ γεγεννῆσθαι, πρὸς τὸ καὶ τό,
περὶ ὃ ταῦτα, παραστῆσαί τε καὶ δηλῶσαι, ἀλλὰ δεῖ καὶ

9. 1 om ουν ac ΙΙ 3 δὴ] δε e ǁ 5 περιεκτικὸν] ’deest in nonnullis codd.’ ||
6 ἀγέννητον] ἀγένητον c1 || 8 ὄντι] ὂν e || 11 om θεοῦ f ‘Or. I’


9. We thus reach a negative truth
about God, but a negative truth gives
us no positive information.


2. τ. θεοπνεύστων] i.e. it is nowhere
taught in the Bible. It is, as
Elias says, a heathen and esp. a
Stoic speculation.


3. τῆς ἤμ’. αὐλῆς] ‘ does not belong
to θίς fold.’


5. παραστ. τε κ. περιεκτ.] The
confession that He is incorporeal
does not amount to a positive statement
or description of His being.


7. περὶ θεοῦ ἢ περὶ θεόν] The
construction with the ace. is the less
direct, and therefore suits better the
scrupulous εὐλάβεια of Gr.'s language:
‘of God or in connexion with
God.’


8. τί γὰρ ὄντι αὐτῶ The κατὰ
τὴν φ. is to be taken with ὑπάρχει,
not with ὄντι. The sense is, ‘What
substantive element is it in God's
being, what light does it throw upon
His nature and underlying essence,
to say that He has no beginning,’
etc.? Ὑπόστασις is used in its older,
untechnical sense, ‘person,’ but
’substance,’ as in Heb. i 3.


9. ἐξίστασθαι...περατοῦσθαι] Ἐξίστ.
‘to be moved out of oneself, so to
change: Plat. Rep. 380 D ἐκστῆναι
τῆς φύσεως. Περατ. (from πέρας) ‘to
be limited’: Arist. de Mund. ii 2.


10. ἀλλ’ δὸν τὸ εἶναι] ‘Nay, the
whole of the divine essence is left
(untouched by these negative statements)
to be conceived of and philosophically
treated ated and examined.’


13. πρὸς τὸ καἰ τό] ‘with regard
to this or that object’: περὶ ὃ
‘to which the description applies.’


ib. τὸ ... παραστῆσαί τε κ. δ.]
coupled by ἢ to εἰπεῖν.




τὸ ὑποκείμενον τούτοις εἰπεῖν, εἰ μέλλοι τελείως καὶ
ἀποχρώντως τὸ νοούμενον παραστήσεσθαι· ἢ γὰρ ἄνθρωπος
ἢ βοῦς ἢ ἵππος τοῦτο τὸ ἐνσώματον καὶ γεννώμενον
καὶ φθειρόμενον· οὕτως οὐδὲ ἐκεῖ στήσεται μέχρι

τοῦ εἰπεῖν ἃ μή ἐστιν ὁ τὴν τοῦ ὄντος πολυπραγμονῶν
φύσιν, ἀλλὰ δεῖ, πρὸς τῷ εἰπεῖν ἃ μή ἐστι, καὶ ὅ ἐστιν
εἰπεῖν, ὅσῳ καὶ ῥᾷον ἕν τι περιλαβεῖν, ἢ τὰ πάντα καθ᾿
ἕκαστον ἀπειπεῖν,—ἵνα ἔκ τε τῆς ἀναιρέσεως ὧν οὔκ ἐστι,
καὶ τῆς οὗ ἐστὶ θέσεως, περιληφθῇ τὸ νοούμενον. ὁ δὲ ἃ

μὲν οὔκ ἐστι λέγων, σιωπῶν δὲ ὅ ἐστι, ποιεῖ παραπλήσιον,
ὥσπερ ἂν εἰ τὰ πέντε δὶς ὅσα ἐστὶν ἐρωτώμενος ὅτι μὲν
οὐ δύο λέγοι, οὐδὲ τρεῖς, οὐδὲ τέσσαρες, οὐδὲ πέντε, οὐδὲ
εἴκοσιν, οὐδὲ τριάκοντα, οὐδέ τινα, ἵνα συνελὼν εἴπω, τῶν
ἐντὸς δεκάδος ἢ δεκαδικῶν ἀριθμῶν· ὅτι δὲ εἴη δέκα μὴ

λέγοι, μηδὲ ἐρείδοι τὸν νοῦν τοῦ ἐρωτῶντος εἰς τὸ ζητούμενον.
πολλῷ γὰρ ῥᾷον καὶ συντομώτερον ἐκ τοῦ ὅ ἐστιν
ὅσα οὔκ ἐστι δηλῶσαι, ἢ ἐκ τοῦ ἀνελεῖν ἃ μή ἐστιν ὅ ἐστιν
ἐνδείξασθαι.


Ἢ τοῦτο μὲν παντὶ δῆλον.

 

ἐπεὶ δέ ἐστιν

1 μελλοι] -λει ‘Reg. a’ || 6 προς το ειπ be || 8 om τε a || 11 om αν ‘Or. 1’
|| 12 λεγοι] -ει ‘Reg. a tres Colb. Or. 1’ ut vid || τρεις ουδε τεσσαρες]
τρια ουδε -ρα cde : τρεις ουδε -ρας b || 16 om γαρ d || εστιν] + ειπειν c


2. ἀποχρώντως] ‘sufficiently,’
‘adequately.’


4. οὐδὲ ἐκεῖ] in the case of incorporeal
existences.


ib. μέχρι τοῦ εἰπεῖν] In accordance
with the double meaning of all
such words, μέχρι has here the inclusive
sense (‘so long as’), not the
exclusive (‘until’). It is much less
common when μ. is used prepositionally,
as here. Οὐ στήσεται μέχρι τ.
εἰ. ‘will not stop short with saying.’
Cp. § 16, 31.


5. πολυπραγμονῶν] ‘inquiring’
The word does not necessarily imply
censure, esp. in the later Greek.
Cyril Jer. uses it of God (Procat.
§ 2). The τοῦ ὄντος does not specially
refer to God (ὁ ὤν), but quite
generally to any existing thing which
is under discussion.


8. ἀπειπεῖν] ‘to reject,’ ‘deny.’


ib. ἵνα ἔκ τε] depends on δεὸ.


ib. ὧν οὔκ ἐστι] by attraction for
τούτων ἃ οὐκ ἑ. ; so directly after,
τῆς οὗ ἐστὶ θ. for τῆς τούτου ὅ ἐστι.


11. τὰ πέντε δὶς ὅσα ἑ.] ‘how many
twice five is.’


13. τῶν ἐντὸς δεκάδος ἢ δ. ἀ.] ‘of
the numbers below ten or between the
multiples of ten.’


15. ἐρείδοL . . . εἰd] ‘satisfy . . . with’;
lit. ‘plant firmly . . . upon.’


19. ἤ] This elliptical and idio-
matic
use of ἤ suggests the alternative,
‘deny this if you can; or let us
take it as self-evident and pass on.’
The μὲν is strictly answered by ἐπεὶ
δέ, and there ought not to be such a
break between them as is indicated
by the usual division of chapters.




ἀσώματον ἡμῖν τὸ θεῖον, μικρόν τι προσεξετάσωμεν.
πότερον οὐδαμοῦ τοῦτο, ἢ ἔστιν ὅπου; εἰ μὲν γὰρ
οὐδαμοῦ, ζητήσαι τις ἃν τῶν ἄγαν ἐξεταστικῶν, πῶς ἂν
καὶ εἴη. εἰ γὰρ τὸ μὴ ὃν οὐδαμοῦ, τὸ μηδαμοῦ τυχὸν
οὐδὲ ὄν. εἰ δέ ἐστί που, πάντως ἐπείπερ ἐστὶν ἢ ἐν

τῷ παντὶ ἢ ὑπὲρ τὸ πᾶν. ἀλλ’ εἰ μὲν ἐν τῷ παντί,
ἤ τινι, ἢ πανταχοῦ. καὶ εἰ μὲν ἔν τινι, ὑπ’ ἐλάττονος
περιγραφήσεται τοῦ τινός, εἰ δὲ πανταχοῦ, ὑπὸ πλείονος
καὶ ἄλλου πολλοῦ, λέγω δὲ τὸ περιεχόμενον τοῦ περιέχοντος,
εἰ τὸ πᾶν ὑπὸ τοῦ παντὸς μέλλοι περισχεθήσεσθαι,

καὶ μηδένα τόπον εἶναι περιγραφῆς ἐλεύθερον. ταῦτα μέν

10. 3 τις ἀν’] om ἀν’ d ΙΙ 7 η τινι] ἐν τινι e || 10 μέλλοι] -λει d


10. Gr. makes a digression to
enquire how God is related to space.


2. ἐστιν ὅπου] ‘somewhere,’ like
ἐστιν ὧν in i 5.


3. πῶς ἂν καἰ εἴη] ‘how it can
exist at all.’


5. πάντως ἐπείπερ ἐστὶν ἢ... ἤ] ‘it
must of course be because it is either
...or.’


7. ἤ τινι, ἢ πανταχοῦ] ‘it must
reside either in α section of the universe,
or extending throughout the
whole: The passage which follows
is characterized by Gr. himself (in
§ 11) as σκολιὸν γριφοειδές. Editors,
therefore, and translators may
be excused if they have made nonsense
of it by wrong punctuation
and by impossible renderings. The
drift, however, is plain enough. Gr.
places his opponent in a dilemma.
If the Divine Being is located in a
section of the universe, it is circumscribed
by something relatively small
τοῦ τινός=the supposed section,
ἐλάττονος in comparison with τὸ
πᾶν); a notion which is manifestly
absurd. If on the other hand it is
located in the universe at large, yet
still (ex hypothesi) within the universe,
then, though the thing which
circumscribes it is relatively great
πλ. καὶ ἄλλου πολλοῦ=‘greater than
other great things’), yet none
less it is as much circumscribed as
in the former case. This follows
from the very statement that τὸ θεῖον
is ‘in’ the universe, which at once
involves the relation of the thing
containing to the thing contpined
(grammatically τὸ περιεχόμενον is in
apposition to the subject of περιγραφήσεται,
and τοῦ περιέχοντος to
ἐλάττονος τοῦ τινός and to πλείονος
respectively). To complete the argument,
however, it is necessary to
postulate εἰ...μέλλοι) that the universe
is not positively infinite but
contained within itself if within nothing
else, and that as it consists of
space-relations it cannot he exempt
from the possibility of circumscription.
(The grammar of the last
clause is apparently irregular, and
some word like χρὴ must be supplied
from μέλλοι; but it is possible that
Gr. intends μέλλοι to stand absolutely
and impersonally in both clauses
(=‘it is to be a ’), making τό
πᾶν περισχ. ace. and inf., like μ.
τόπον εἶναι).




εἰ ἐν τῷ παντί. καὶ ποῦ πρὶν γενέσθαι τὸ πᾶν; οὐδὲ γὰρ
τοῦτο μικρὸν εἰς ἀπορίαν. εἰ δὲ ὑπὲρ τὸ πᾶν, ἆρ᾿ οὐδὲν ἦν
τὸ διορίζον αὐτὸ τοῦ παντός; ποῦ δὲ τὸ ὑπὲρ τοῦτο; καὶ
πῶς ἐνοήθη τὸ ὑπεραῖρον καὶ ὑπεραιρόμενον, οὐκ ὄντος

ὅρου τινὸς τοῦ τέμνοντος ταῦτα καὶ διορίζοντος; ἢ χρὴ
πάντως εἶναι τὸ μέσον, καὶ ᾧ περατοῦται τὸ πᾶν καὶ τὸ
ὑπὲρ τὸ πᾶν; καὶ τί ἄλλο τοῦτο ἢ τόπος ἐστίν, ὅνπερ
ἐφύγομεν; καὶ οὔπω λέγω τὸ περιγραπτὸν πάντως εἶναι
τὸ θεῖον, καὶ εἰ διανοίᾳ καταληπτόν· ἓν γὰρ περιγραφῆς

εἶδος καὶ ἡ κατάληψις.

 

τίνος οὖν ἕνεκεν ταῦτα διῆλθον, καὶ περιεργότερον
ἴσως ἢ κατὰ τὰς τῶν πολλῶν ἀκοάς, καὶ κατὰ τὸν νῦν
κεκρατηκότα τύπον τῶν λόγων, ὃς τὸ γενναῖον καὶ ἁπλοῦν
ἀτιμάσας τὸ σκολιὸν καὶ γριφοειδὲς ἐπεισήγαγεν· ὡς ἐκ

2 ει δε] ουδ e || 5 η] ει f || 9 om εἰ ‘Reg. Cypr.’ 11. 12 καὶ
om κάτα b


1. καὶ που] ’And, still assuming
that τὸ θεῖον is located in the universe,
where was it,’ etc.


2. οὐδέν ἢν τὸ δ.] Gr. turns to
the other horn of his first dilemma,
and asks, What is there (if τὸ θεῖον
is above the universe) to divide between
tween the universe and it? The
past tense ἦν, ἐνοήθη) in the preg-
nant Greek idiom refers back to the
moment when the opponent is supposed
to have adopted the con-
clusion.


3. τὸ ὑπὲρ τοῦτο] i.e. ὑπὲρ τὸ πᾶν.


4. τὸ ὑπεραῖρον κ. ὒ.] ὑπεραίρειν
‘to transcend’ (cp. § 3) represents
εἶναι ὑπὲρ τὸ πᾶν. The single art.,
not repeated before ὑπεραιρόμενον,
shews, of course, that the difficulty
lies not in conceiving of the two
things themselves, but in conceiving
their relation to each other.


5. ἢ χρή] In English we say,
’Must there not be?’; in Greek
there any alternative,) or must there
be?’


6. καὶ ᾧ π.] Καὶ here adds
another description of τὸ μέσον, not
a separate thing; and in τὸ μ. the
art. is used as in τὸ διορίζον just
above.


7. τοῦτο] sc. τὸ μέσον.


8. ἐφύγομεν] when we asked ποῦ
τὸ ὑπὲρ τὸ πᾶν].


ib. καὶ οὔπω λοῶ κτλ.] ‘And
I do not now insist upon the fact
that τὸ π. εἶναι).’


9. ἐν γάρ] ’for comprehension is
one form of circumscription.’


11 The purpose of the digression
was to exemplify the barren dialectic
of the Eunomians, as well as to shew
that God is incomprehensible. He is
so, not because He grudges the knowledge
to man, whom He loves.


14. γριφοειδές] from γρῖφος, ‘a
crab-pot,’ and so ‘a conundrum.’
is a hit at the Eunomian style of
argument.


ib. ὡς]=ὥστε. The tree is known
by its fruits (Matt, vii 20) and the
absence of light among the Eunomian
theologians by the obscurity of
their language.




τῶν καρπῶν τὸ δένδρον γινώσκεσθαι, λέγω δὲ τὸ ἐνεργοῦν
τὰ τοιαῦτα δόγματα σκότος ἐκ τοῦ ζόφου τῶν λεγομένων;
οὐ γὰρ ἵνα καὶ αὐτὸς παράδοξα λέγειν δόξω, καὶ περιττὸς
φαίνωμαι τὴν σοφίαν, πλέκων συνδέσμους καὶ διαλύων
κρατούμενα· τοῦτο δὴ τὸ μέγα θαῦμα τοῦ Δανιήλ· ἀλλ’

ἵν ἐκεῖνο δηλώσαιμι, ὅ μοι λέγειν ὁ λόγος ἀπ’ ἀρχῆς
ὥρμησεν. τοῦτο δὲ ἦν τί; τὸ μὴ ληπτὸν εἶναι ἀνθρωπίνῃ
διανοίᾳ τὸ θεῖον, μηδὲ ὅλον ὅσον ἐστὶ φαντάζεσθαι· καὶ
τοῦτο οὔτε διὰ φθόνον,—μακρὰν γὰρ τῆς θείας φύσεως
φθόνος, τῆς γε ἀπαθοῦς καὶ μόνης ἀγαθῆς καὶ κυρίας, καὶ

μάλιστα τῶν ἑαυτοῦ κτισμάτων περὶ τὸ τιμιώτατον· τί
γὰρ Λόγῳ πρὸ τῶν λογικῶν; ἐπεὶ καὶ αὐτὸ τὸ ὑποστῆναι
τῆς ἄκρας ἀγαθότητος·—οὔτε εἰς τιμὴν ἑαυτοῦ καὶ δόξαν
τοῦ πλήρους, ἵνα τῷ ἀνεφίκτῳ τὸ τίμιον ἔχῃ καὶ τὸ
σεβάσμιον. τοῦτο γὰρ πάντως σοφιστικὸν καὶ ἀλλότριον,

μὴ ὅτι θεοῦ, ἀλλ’ οὐδὲ ἀνθρώπου μετρίως ἐπιεικοῦς, καί
τι δεξιὸν ἑαυτῷ συνειδότος, ἐκ τοῦ κωλύειν ἑτέρους τὸ
πρωτεῖον πορίζεσθαι.


3 παραδοξα] -ξον c ΙΙ 7 ἢν τι] τι ἢν e || 16 μετρίως] τελείως f


3. καἰ αὐτός] like them.


4. συνδέσμους] The words are a
reference to Dan. v 12, where Theodotion's
version has ἀναγγέλλων κρατούμενα
καἰ λύων συνδέσμους, and a
little before, πνεῦμα περισσὸν ἐν αὐτῷ.
While Dan., however, ’shewed hard
sentence’ and ‘dissovled doubts,’
the Eunomians ’wove’ doubts (fetters).


6. δηλώσαιμι] ‘I did it, not that
I may gain credit (subj.), but that
might demonstrate (opt.) what Ι
started with.’


8. μηδὲ ὅλον] The ὅλον is ad-
verbial, ‘nor nor at all to form an imagination
of His greatness.’


10. ἀπαθοῦς] not ‘incapable of
suffering’ but ‘free from passions’
such as jealousy.


11. τὸ τιμιώτατον] i.e. man. The
next clause τί γὰρ Λ.) justifies
τιμιώτατον.


13. τῆς ἄκρασ ἀγ.] sc. ἐστί:
very existence is an outcome of.’


14. τοῦ πλήρους] agrees with
ἑαυτοῦ, and = πλήρους ὄντος; cp.
§ 31. It is a ref. to Is. 11. Cp.
Athan. Or. ii c. Ar. § 29.


ib. τῷ ἀνεφίκτῳ] from ἐφικνέομαι
‘to arrive at’; ‘His inaccessibility.


16. μὴ ὅτι] cp. § 4. θεοῦ is governed
verned by ἀλλότριον, ‘foreign to the
character of God.’


ib. οὐδέ] loosely thrown in, as
instead of ἀλλ’. he had said ἀνάξιον.
17. δεξιὸν ἑ. συνειδότος] ‘has anything
of a proper conscience.’


ib. ἐκ τοῦ κ.ἑ.] a clause epexegetic
of τοῦτο.




 

Ἀλλ’ εἰ μὲν καὶ δι’ ἄλλας αἰτίας, εἰδεῖεν ἂν οἱ
ἐγγυτέρω θεοῦ, καὶ τῶν ἀνεξιχνιάστων αὐτοῦ κριμάτων
ἐπόπται καὶ θεωροί, εἴπερ εἰσί τινες τοσοῦτοι τὴν ἀρετήν,
καὶ ἐν ἴχνεσιν ἀβύσσου περιπατοῦντες, τὸ δὴ λεγόμενον.

ὅσον δ’ οὖν ἡμεῖς κατειλήφαμεν, μικροῖς μέτροις μετροῦντες
τὰ δυσθεώρητα, τάχα μέν, ἵνα μὴ τῷ ῥᾳδίῳ τῆς κτήσεως
ῥᾴστη γένηται καὶ ἡ τοῦ κτηθέντος ἀποβολή· φιλεῖ γὰρ
τὸ μὲν πόνῳ κτηθὲν μᾶλλον κρατεῖσθαι, τὸ δὲ ῥᾳδίως
κτηθὲν καὶ ἀποπτύεσθαι τάχιστα, ὡς πάλιν ληφθῆναι

δυνάμενον· καὶ οὕτως εὐεργεσία καθίσταται τὸ μὴ πρόχειρον
τῆς εὐεργεσίας, τοῖς γε νοῦν ἔχουσι. τάχα δέ, ὡς
μὴ ταὐτὸν ἡμᾶς τῷ πεσόντι ἑωσφόρῳ πάσχειν, ἐκ τοῦ τὸ
φῶς ὅλον χωρῆσαι κατέναντι κυρίου παντοκράτορος τραχηλιᾷν,
καὶ πίπτειν ἐκ τῆς ἐπάρσεως πτῶμα πάντων

ἐλεεινότατον. τυχὸν δέ, ἵν’ ἦ τι πλέον ἐκεῖθεν ἆθλον
φιλοπονίας καὶ λαμπροῦ βίου τοῖς ἐνταῦθα κεκαθαρμένοις
καὶ μακροθυμοῦσι πρὸς τὸ ποθούμενον. διὰ τοῦτο μέσος
ἡμῶν τε καὶ θεοῦ ὁ σωματικὸς οὗτος ἵσταται γνόφος,
ὥσπερ ἡ νεφέλη τὸ πάλαι τῶν Αἰγυπτίων καὶ τῶν Ἑβραίων.

καὶ τοῦτό ἐστιν ἴσως, ὃ ἔθετο σκότος ἀποκρυφὴν αὐτοῦ,

12. 9 ἀποπτύεσθαι] -εται ‘Or. Ι’ || 13 χώρησαι] + καὶ e || 19 om το ef


12. Perhaps one reason for
difficulty of knowing God properly
is to make us value the knowledge;
another, to save us from pride, or to
enhance the reward of earnest search.
In any case, the infirmity of our bodily
nature ttecessarily colours all our
ideas of God.


1. δι’ ἄλλας αἰ.] other than those
which he is about to allege.


2. ἀνεξιχν. ... κριμάτων] Cp.
Rom. xi 33. The form of the sen-
tence is quite general, and may in-
clude both angelic beings and
(though somewhat ironically) privi-
human beings also.


4. ἐν ἴχν. ἀβ. περιπ.] Job xxxviii
16 (LXX.).


6. τῷ ῥᾳδίῳ τῆς κτ.] ‘lightly
the gotten, lightly spent.’


8. μᾶλλον κρατεῖσθαι] ‘the more
firmly held.’


10. τὸ μὴ πρόχειρον] The very
fact that the benefit is not too easily
attained is itself a benefit.


12. ἑωσφόρῳ] Is. xiv. 12.


13. χωρῆσαι, ‘take in.’


ib. κατέναντι κ. π. τρ] Job xv
25. Trax is to lift up the neck,
like a rearing horse.


15. ἐκεῖθεν] ‘on yonder side’
death: cp. i 8.


19 τῶν Αἶγ’. κ. τ. ‘Εβ.] Ex. xiv
20. That cloud was only an obleged
struction on the Egyptian side of it.


20. ὃ ἔθετο σκότος] ‘the the darkness
which He ’’ etc. Ps. xvii (xviii)
12.




τὴν ἡμετέραν παχύτητα, δι’ ἢν ὀλίγοι καὶ μικρὸν διακύπτουσιν.
τοῦτο μὲν οὖν φιλοσοφείτωσαν οἷς ἐπιμελὲς,
καὶ ἀνίτωσαν ἐπὶ πλεῖστον τῆς διασκέψεως. ἡμῖν δ’ οὑν
ἐκεῖνο γνώριμον τοῖς δεσμίοις τῆς γῆς, ὅ φησιν ὁ θεῖος
Ἱερεμίας, καὶ τὸ παχὺ τοῦτο σαρκίον περιβεβλημένοις, ὅτι

ὥσπερ ἀδύνατον ὑπερβῆναι τὴν ἑαυτοῦ σκιάν, καὶ τῷ λίαν
ἐπειγομένῳ,—φθάνει γὰρ ἀεὶ τοσοῦτον, ὅσον καταλαμβάνεται,
—ἢ τοῖς ὁρατοῖς πηλσιάσαι τὴν ὄψιν δίχα τοῦ ἐν
φωτὸς καὶ ἀέρος, ἢ τῶν ὑδάτων ἔξω τὴν νηκτὴν φύσιν
διολισθαίνειν, οὕτως ἀμήχανον τοῖς ἐν σώμασι δίχα τῶν

σωματικῶν πάντη γενέσθαι μετὰ τῶν νοουμένων. ἀεὶ γάρ
τι παρεμπεσεῖται τῶν ἡμετέρων, κἂν ὅτι μάλιστα χωρίσας
ἑαυτὸν τῶν ὁρωμένων ὁ νοῦς, καὶ καθ’ ἑαυτὸν γενόμενος,
προσβάλλειν ἐπιχειρῇ τοῖς συγγενέσι καὶ ἀοράτοις.
γνώσῃ δὲ οὕτως.

 

Οὐ πνεῦμα καὶ πῦρ καὶ φῶς, ἀγάπη τε καὶ σοφία
καὶ δικαιοσύνη, καὶ νοῦς καὶ λόγος, καὶ τὰ τοιαῦτα, αἱ
προσηγορίαι τῆς πρώτης φύσεως; τί οὖν; ἢ πνεῦμα
νοήσεις δίχα φορᾶς καὶ χύσεως; ἢ πῦρ ἔξω τῆς ὕλης, καὶ
τῆς ἄνω φορᾶς, καὶ τοῦ ἰδίου χρώματός τε καὶ σχήματος; ἢ

φῶς οὐκ ἀέρι σύγκρατόν τε καὶ ἄφετόν τοῦ οἷον γεννῶντός

4 om ο θεῖος c II 5 προβεβλημένοις cde || 6 υπερβηναι] ἐστιν υπερβαινειν
‘Reg. Cypr.’ ΙΙ 10 σωμασι] -τι e 13. 18 πρωτης] θείας df ||
19 χυσεως] συγχύσεως d


7. οἷς ἐπιμελές] ‘who make it
their business.’ i.e.

ἐκεῖνο] viz. what follows.
ib. τοῖς δ. τῆς γῆς] Lam. iii 34.

τὸ π. τ σαρκίον] Cp. § 4.
ib. περιβεβλημένοις] The read-
ing προβ., though perh. less strongly
by the MSS., has in its
favour Gr.'s characteristic use of
πρόβλημα; see iv 6.


7. φθάνει κτλ.] ‘it always anti-
cipates your movement by just the
step you take to catch it.’


9. τῶν ὑδάτων ἀῶ] Ἔξω comes
after its case. Νηκτήν from νήχω
‘to swim’; ν. φύσις, ’the
kind,’ i.e. fish Διολισθ. to glide
along.’ Cp. § 24.


13. The most abstract conceptions
have to be conveyed in language of a
concrete nature, through which the
mind, in its longing after God, strugsupported
gles with difficulty.


18. τῆς πρ. φύσεως] Cp. § 3, 7, 14.


19. φορᾶς κ. χύσεως] ‘movement
and effusion: χύσις seems to refer
to the source, from which the breath
(wind) isemitted. Cp. χεόμενον below.


21. σύγκρατόν τε] a curioua use
of τε, which is here attached to the
whole phrase οὐκ ἁ. σύγκρατον, not
merely to σύγκρ., unless we are to
suppose that Gr. at first intended to
say instead of ἄφετόν τ. οἷον γ., ‘detached
from that which generates it,
so to speak? some word like σύνδετον,
‘connected with.’




τε καὶ φωτίζοντος; νοῦν δὲ τίνα; μὴ τὸν ἐν ἄλλῳ, καὶ
οὗ κινήματα τὰ διανοήματα, ἠρεμοῦντα ἢ προβαλλόμενα;
λόγον δὲ τίνα παρὰ τὸν ἡσυχάζοντα ἐν ἡμῖν, ἢ
χεόμενον; ὀκνῶ γὰρ εἰπεῖν, λυόμενον. εἰ δὲ καὶ σοφίαν,

τίνα παρὰ τὴν ἕξιν, καὶ τὴν ἐν τοῖς θεωρήμασιν, εἴτε
θείοις, εἴτε καὶ ἀνθρωπίνοις; δικαιοσύνην τε καὶ ἀγάπην,
οὐ διαθέσεις ἐπαινουμένας, καὶ τὴν μὲν τῆς ἀδικίας, τὴν
δὲ τοῦ μίσους ἀντίπαλον, ἐπιτεινομένας τε καὶ ἀνιεμένας,
προσγινομένας τε καὶ ἀπογινομένας, καὶ ὅλως ποιούσας

ἡμᾶς καὶ ἀλλοιούσας, ὥσπερ αἱ χρόαι τὰ σώματα; ἢ δεῖ
τούτων ἀποστάντας ἡμᾶς αὐτὸ καθ’ ἑαυτὸ τὸ θεῖον ἐκ τούτων
ἰδεῖν, ὡς οἷόν τε, μερικήν τινα φαντασίαν ἐκ τῶν εἰκασμάτων

1 μὴ] η c: εἰ μὴ d || ἐν] ἐπ’ e || 2 om τὰ διανοήματα f ǁ 5 ἐν τοῖς] + νοήμασι
καὶ ’Reg. a’ ΙΙ 8 ἀνιεμένας] ἀνειμένας b ‘aliique’ || 9 om
ἀπογινομένας e: προγινομένας f ǁ 11 om ἐκ τούτων def


1. μὴ τὸν ἐν ἄλλῳ] Μῆ here expects
the affirmative answer: ‘is it
not?’ We cannot think of νοῦς
existing independently, but as a
faculty of something or some one.


2. οὗ κινήμ. τὰ δ.] not ‘whose
movements are thoughts,’ but
movements thoughts are.’ The
is that we cannot imagine thoughts,
uttered or unuttered, without some
kind of movement, which involves
a change, in the mind which thinks
them.


4. χεόμενον] The word is often
used of producing a sound. Gr.
uses it here to bring out the notion
of dissipation inseparable from
utterance. He shrinks however
from saying ‘dissolved,’ ‘persihsing’
λυόμ.), because, although the sound
comes to an end, there is a sense in
which the ‘word’ remains. What
Gr. means by λυόμενον is made clear
by iv 17 λυομένη φωνῇ.


5. τὴν ἕξιν, κ. τ. ἐν τ. θεωρ.]
Wisdom can only be conceived of
as a ‘habit’ (the Aristotelian word)
of some personal subject, and occupied
upon some object. It cannot
be conceived of as isolated and self-
existent.


7. διαθέσεις] In the same way
‘righteousness,’ ‘love,’ are ‘dispositions’
of a person, not abstract
things; and for us they derive their
meaning from a contrast with their
opposites. Tey are, moreover,
constantly changing, and the subject
in which they reside varies ac-
cordingly.


11. τούτων ἀποστ.] The ταῦτα
must mean the relative notions which
Gr. has shewn to be inseparable
from the προσηγορίαι which he has
discussed. He cannot mean the
προσηγ. themselves, because he goes
on to use them as εἰκάσματα. In
the next sentence τούτων = τῶν εἰκασ-
μάτων.




συλλεγομένους; τίς οὖν ἡ μηχανὴ ἐκ τούτων τε καὶ μὴ
ταῦτα; ἢ πῶς ταῦτα πάντα, καὶ τελείως ἕκαστον, τὸ ἓν
τῇ φύσει ἀσύνθετον καὶ ἀνείκαστον; οὕτω κάμνει ἐκβῆναι
τὰ σωματικὰ ὁ ἡμέτερος νοῦς, καὶ γυμνοῖς ὁμιλῆσαι τοῖς
ἀσωμάτοις, ἕως σκοπεῖ μετὰ τῆς ἰδίας ἀσθενείας τὰ ὑπὲρ

δύναμιν. ἐπεὶ ἐφίεται μὲν πᾶσα λογικὴ φύσις θεοῦ καὶ
τῆς πρώτης αἰτίας· καταλαβεῖν δὲ ἀδυνατεῖ, δι’ ἃς εἶπον
αἰτίας. κάμνουσα δὲ τῷ πόθῳ, καὶ οἷον σφαδάζουσα, καὶ
τὴν ζημίαν οὐ φέρουσα, δεύτερον ποιεῖται πλοῦν, ἢ πρὸς
τὰ ὁρώμενα βλέψαι, καὶ τούτων τι ποιῆσαι θεόν, κακῶς

εἰδυῖα,—τί γὰρ τῶν ὁρατῶν τοῦ ὁρῶντος καὶ πόσον ἐστὶν
ὑψηλότερόν τε καὶ θεοειδέστερον, ἵν ἦ τὸ μὲν προσκυνοῦν,
τὸ δὲ προσκυνούμενον;—ἢ διὰ τοῦ κάλλους τῶν ὁρωμένων
καὶ τῆς εὐταξίας θεὸν γνωρίσαι, καὶ ὁδηγῷ τῇ ὄψει τῶν
ὑπὲρ τὴν ὄψιν χρήσασθαι, ἀλλὰ μὴ ζημιωθῆναι θεὸν διὰ

τῆς μεγαλοπρεπείας τῶν ὁρωμένων.

 

Ἐντεῦθεν οἱ μὲν ἥλιον, οἱ δὲ σελήνην, οἱ δὲ

3 φύσει] + καὶ e || 10 ποιησαι] σασθαι e ǁ 11 om ἐστιν e


1. τίς οὖν ἡ μ. κτλ.] By what
contrivance, he asks, can we construct
an imagnation of God out of
these materials and yet not identified
with them? How can we use words
like ‘light’ and ‘love’ to help us in
representing Him to our minds, and
yet eliminate from the representation
notions which are of the very essence
of ‘light’ and ‘love’ as known to
us?—The sentence is elliptical: ἡ
μηχ. is not the φαντασία which we
attempt to form ἐκ τούτων·. in full it
would be something like τίς ἡ μηχ.
ἐκ τούτων τε συλλέγεσθαι φ. κ. μ. τ.


2. ἢ πῶς τ. π.] Supposing the
difficulty last stated to be sur-
mounted, how can we reconcile the
thought of God's absolute unity with
that of a combination of separate
images, even when these images are
carried to their perfection?


3. κάμνει] ‘wearies itself...so long
ἃς it investigates.’


8. σφαδάζουσα] ‘to plunge,’
a restive horse.


9. δεύτερον π. πλοῦν] a well-
known proverb, like ‘trying the
second string.’ The mind
itself unable to comprehend God,
but it cannot give up trying. Two
alternatives lie before it; either to
fall into idolatry, or to use nature
as a suggestion of what is above
nature.


10. κακῶς κακῶς εἰδυῖα] ‘and it makes a
great mistake.’


15. ζημιωθῆναι θ.] It was the
fear of this ζημία, as Gr. has said,
which led to idolatry (in the wide
sense of the word); and by idolatry
they incurred it.


14. Some, impatient of the
struggle, sink into worship of natural
objects, or of images.


17. ἐντεῦθεν] sc. διὰ τῆς μεγαλοπρ.
τ. ὁρ. Cp. Wisd. xiii 3.




ἀστέρων πλῆθος, οἱ δὲ οὐρανὸν αὐτὸν ἅμα τούτοις, οἷς καὶ
τὸ πᾶν ἄγειν δεδώκασι κατὰ τὸ ποιὸν ἢ ποσὸν τῆς κινήσεως·
οἱ δὲ τὰ στοιχεῖα, γῆν, ὕδωρ, ἀέρα, πῦρ, διὰ τὸ χρειῶδες,
ὧν ἄνευ οὐδὲ συστῆναι δυνατὸν τὸν ἀνθρώπινον βίον· οἱ

δὲ ὅ τι τύχοιεν ἕκαστος τῶν ὁρατῶν ἐσεβάσθησαν, ὧν
ἑώρων τὰ κάλλιστα θεοὺς προστησάμενοι. εἰσὶ δὲ οἳ καὶ
εἰκόνας καὶ πλάσματα, πρῶτα μὲν τῶν οἰκείων, οἵ γε
περιπαθέστεροι καὶ σωματικώτεροι, καὶ τιμῶντες τοὺς
ἀπελθόντας τοῖς ὑπομνήμασιν· ἔπειτα καὶ τῶν ξένων, οἱ

μετ’ ἐκείνους καὶ μακρὰν ἀπ’ ἐκείνων, ἀγνοίᾳ τῆς πρώτης
φύσεως, καὶ ἀκολουθίᾳ τῆς παραδοθείσης τιμῆς, ὡς ἐννόμου
καὶ ἀναγκαίας, ἐπειδὴ χρόνῳ τὸ ἔθος βεβαιωθὲν ἐνομίσθη
νόμος. οἶμαι δὲ καὶ δυναστείαν τινὲς θεραπεύοντες, καὶ
ῥώμην ἐπαινέσαντες, καὶ κάλλος θαυμάσαντες, θεὸν ἐποίησαν

τῷ χρόνῳ τὸν τιμώμενον, προσλαβόμενοί τινα καὶ
μῦθον τῆς ἐξαπάτης ἐπίκουρον.

 

Οἱ ἐμπαθέστεροι δὲ αὐτῶν καὶ τὰ πάθη θεοὺς
ἐνόμισαν, ἢ θεοῖς ἐτίμησαν, θυμόν, καὶ μιαιφονίαν, καὶ
ἀσέλγειαν, καὶ μέθην, καὶ οὐκ οἶδ’ ὅ τι ἄλλο τῶν τούτοις

παραπλησίων, οὐ καλὴν οὐδὲ δικαίαν ταύτην ἀπολογίαν

14. 16 ἐξαπάτης] -τησεως be 15. 18 θέοις] θεοὺς de || 20 απολογιαν
ταύτην ce


2. κατὰ τὸ ποιὸν ἢ ποσὸν τ. κ. ]
It is hard to see what Gr. means by
this phrase. Elias gives an elabo-
rate double explanation which only
shews how much it puzzled him.
Prob. by τὸ ποσόν Gr. means ’the
’ of motion,—the planets e.g.
moving at a different ‘rate’ from
the fixed stars; while τὸ ποῖον would
include their conjunctions.


5. ὁ τι τύχοιεν ἔκ. τ ὁρ.] τῶν
ὁρ. depends on ὅ τι; ἕκ. is in app.
the subj. of τύχ.; ‘any visible any visible ob-
ject which they happened individn-
ally’ to select.


6. προστῇς.] Cp. § 1.


8. περιπαθέστεροι] ‘more emo-
tional.’


ib. τοὺς ἀπελθόντας] Cp. Wisd.
xiv 15 f. The καὶ couples τιμῶντες
κτλ. to τῶν οἰκ., not to σωματικ.


10. τῆς πρ. φύσεως] Cp. ἑ 13.


12. χρόνῳ τὸ ἔθος κτλ.] Wisd.
xiv 16 εἶτα ἐν χρόνῳ κρατυνθὲν τὸ
ἀσεβὲς ἔθος ὡς νόμος ἐφυλάχθη.


15. προσλαβ. τ. κ. μῦθον] Gr.
adopts the Euemerist view of my-
thology.


15. Some deify their own pasto
sions, and end in utter degradation.
The Evil One deceives them into
worshipping himself as God.


17. καἰ τὰ πάθη] Cp. i 6.


18. θεοῖς ἔτ’.] set gods over them.




εὑράμενοι τῶν οἰκείων ἁμαρτημάτων. καὶ τοὺς μὲν ἀφῆκαν
κάτω, τοὺς δὲ ὑπὸ γῆν ἔκρυψαν,—τοῦτο συνετῶς μόνον,—τοὺς
δὲ ἀνήγαγον εἰς τὸν οὐρανόν. ὢ τῆς γελοίας κληροδοσίας.
εἶτα ἑκάστῳ τῶν πλασμάτων ὄνομά τι θεῶν ἢ
δαιμόνων ἐπιφημίσαντες, κατὰ τὴν ἐξουσίαν καὶ αὐτονομίαν

τῆς πλάνης, καὶ ἀγάλματα ἱδρυσάμενοι, ὧν καὶ τὸ πολυτελὲς
δέλεαρ, αἵμασί τε καὶ κνίσσαις, ἔστι δὲ οἱ γε καὶ πράξεσι
λίαν αἰσχραῖς, μανίαις τε καὶ ἀνθρωποκτονίαις, τιμᾷν
τοῦτο ἐνόμισαν. τοιαύτας γὰρ ἔπρεπεν εἶναι θεῶν τοιούτων
καὶ τὰς τιμάς. ἤδη δὲ καὶ κνωδάλοις, καὶ τετραπόδοις,

καὶ ἑρπετοῖς, καὶ τούτων τοῖς αἰσχίστοις τε καὶ
γελοιοτάτοις, ἑαυτοὺς καθύβρισαν, καὶ τούτοις φέροντες
τὴν τοῦ θεοῦ δόξαν προσέθηκαν· ὡς μὴ ῥᾴδιον εἶναι κρῖναι,
πότερον δεῖ καταφρονεῖν μᾶλλον τῶν προσκυνούντων ἢ
τῶν προσκυνουμένων. τάχα δὲ καὶ πολὺ πλέον τῶν λατρευόντων,

ὅτι λογικῆς ὄντες φύσεως, καὶ χάριν θεοῦ
δεξάμενοι, τὸ χεῖρον ὡς ἄμεινον προεστήσαντο. καὶ τοῦτο
τοῦ πονηροῦ τὸ σόφισμα, τῷ καλῷ καταχρησαμένου πρὸς
τὸ κακόν, οἷα τὰ πολλὰ τῶν ἐκείνου κακουργημάτων.
παραλαβὼν γὰρ αὐτῶν τὸν πόθον πλανώμενον κότα θεοῦ

ζήτησιν, ἵν εἰς ἑαυτὸν περισπάσῃ τὸ κράτος, καὶ κλέψῃ

2 ἔκρυψαν] ἀπέρριψαν ‘Reg. Cypr.’ ΙΙ 3 om τον ‘Or. I’ || 7 οἱ γε] ὅτε
8 τιμὰν τοῦτο] τοῦτο τιμὰν d: τιμὰν τούτους ‘Reg. Cypr.’ ǁ 14 πότερον] -ρων
d ’tresColb.’ || 17 προεστήσαντο] προετιμήσαντο ‘Reg. Cypr.’ ΙΙ 20 πλανωμενον]
-ων b || 21 περισπάσῃ] επισπαση b


2. τοῦτο συνετῶς μόνον] Α
grimly humorous parenthesis: to
bury them under ground was the
only sensible part of the arrange-
ment.


4. τῶν πλασμάτων) ‘these coun-
terfeits.’ Gr. means the personifi-
cations of the passions, not (as in
ἑ 14) the images of them; of the
images he has yet to speak.


5. ἐξουσίαν κ. αὐτονομίαν] Cp.
for ἐξ. § 8: for αὐτὸν. § 8: ‘arbitrary
license.’


10. ἤδη δέ] like iam for mox.
Κνώδαλα, ‘monsters.’


ib. τετραπ. κ ἑρπ.] Cp. Rom. i
23; Wisd. xi 15 (16) ἄλογα ἑρπετὰ
κ. κνώδαλα εὐτελῆ.


15. τῶν λατρ.] so. δεῖ καταφρονεῖν.


16. χάριν θ. δεξ.] Gr. is using the
word in a free and untechnical sense.


19. οἶα τ. π] predicate. The
constr. is τοῦτο τ. σόφ’. ἦν τοιοῦτο]
οἶα τ. π.


20. παραλαβών] i 7 παρ᾿ 
ἠμῶν. . . λαμβάνει.




τὴν ἔφεσιν, ὥσπερ τυφλὸν χειραγωγῶν ὁδοῦ ὁδοῦ τινὸς ἐφιέμενον,
ἄλλους ἀλλαχοῦ κατεκρήμνισε, καὶ διέσπειρεν εἰς ἕν τι
θανάτου καὶ ἀπωλείας βάραθρον.

 

Οὗτοι μὲν δὴ ταῦτα· ἡμᾶς δὲ ὁ λόγος δεξάμενος

ἐφιεμένους θεοῦ, καὶ μὴ ἀνεχομένους τὸ ἀνηγεμόνευτόν τε
καὶ ἀκυβέρνητον, εἶτα τοῖς ὁρωμένοις προσβάλλων καὶ
τοῖς ἀπαρχῆς ἐντυγχάνων, οὔτε μέχρι τούτων ἔστησεν,—
οὐ γὰρ ἦν λόγου δοῦναι τὴν ἡγεμονίαν τοῖς ὁμοτίμοις κατὰ
τὴν αἴσθησιν,—καὶ διὰ τούτων ἄγει πρὸς τὸ ὑπὲρ ταῦτα,

καὶ δι’ οὗ τούτοις τὸ εἶναι περίεστιν. τί γὰρ τὸ τάξαν τὰ
οὐράνια καὶ τὰ ἐπίγεια, ὅσα τε δι’ ἀέρος καὶ ὅσα καθ’ ὕδατος,
μᾶλλον δὲ τὰ πρὸ τούτων, οὐρανόν, καὶ γῆν, καὶ ἀέρα,
καὶ φύσιν ὕδατος; τίς ταῦτα ἔμιξε καὶ ἐμέρισεν; τίς ἢ
κοινωνία τούτων πρὸς ἄλληλα, καὶ συμφυία, καὶ σύμπνοια;

ἐπαινῶ γὰρ τὸν εἰρηκότα, κἂν ἀλλότριος ᾖ. τί τὸ ταῦτα

1 ἔφεσιν] αἴσθησιν e 16. 6 προσβάλλων] προβαλὼν ‘Reg. a, Or. I’ ||
8 ἡγεμονίαν] ὁμοτιμίαν b || 13 τις η κοινωνία] om η c


1. ἔφεσιν] ‘desire,’ from ἐφίεσθαι
§ 13).


16. We, on the other hand, are
led by reason to worship, not nature,
but the Author of nature and its
wonderful order.


4. ὁ λόγος] ‘reason.’ When Rea-
son is said to have taken us in hand,
Gr. means both the reasonable in-
struction given by the Church, and
our own reasonable reflexion upon
it. It is, of course, contrasted with
ὁ πονηρός of the previous section.


6. προσβάλλων] intrans., as in § 6.
ib. κ. τοῖς ἀπαρχῆς ἐντ.] Passing
over the more ephemeral objects, its
attention was arrested by those which
are coeval with creation, like sun
and moon: but it did not allow us
to stop ἔστησεν) there. Μέχρι as
in ἑ 9. We should have expected
οὐδὲ μ.; if οὔτε is right, Gr. must
intend to connect the clause closely
with κα διὰ τούτων.


8. κάτα τὴν αἴσθ.] things as
much subject to the senses as we are.


10. περίεστιν] ‘they still exist’;
or perhaps, ‘they have existence in
abundance’; cp. § 25.


11. δι’ ἀέρος] sc. φέρεται. Καθ’
ὕδατος sc. ἐστίν, ’under the water’;
like κατὰ γῆς ’underground’: cp. § 24.


13. τίς ἡ κοινωνία] If this is the
right reading, of course it is ‘what
is this partnership?’ i.e.
came it? If we read τίς κ., κοίν’. κ.
συμφ. κ. συμπν. must be in ap-
position to the τίς before ἔμιξε, ‘who
combined and distributed them?
what partnership and union and
concord between them?


15. τὸν εἰρηκότα] ‘him who said
it: There is no reason to think
that the words which follow are a
direct quotation. Nor indeed are
the foregoing, but they seem more
likely to have had their origin in a
reminiscence of something that Gr.
had read than the comparatively
colourless words which follow. It is
harder, however, to say, whom Gr.
means by τὸν εἰρ. Elias refers to
Oppian Halieut. i 412 οἵῃ σὺν φιλό-
διακρίνας ἐκέδασσας αἰθέρα τε,
κτλ. Jahn prefers Plato Tim. 35
A foil. The resemblance is not very
close; but in Τἰm. 32 c occur words
which come somewhat nearer. The
‘body of the world,’ Plato there says,
was formed of the various elements
δι’ ἀναλογίας ὁμολογῆσαν, φιλίαν τε
ἔσχεν...εἰς ταὐτὸν αὑτῷ ξυνελθόν.
Perh. Opp. comes the nearer to
Gr's language.




κεκινηκὸς καὶ ἄγον τὴν ἄληκτον φορὰν καὶ ἀκώλυτον; ἀρ’
οὐχ ὁ τεχνίτης τούτων, καὶ πᾶσι λόγον ἐνθείς, καθ’ ὃν τὸ
πᾶν φέρεταί τε καὶ διεξάγεται; τίς δὲ ὁ τεχνίτης τούτων;
ἀρ’ οὐχ ὁ πεποιηκὼς ταῦτα καὶ εἰς τὸ εἶναι παραγαγών;
οὐ γὰρ δὴ τῷ αὐτομάτῳ δοτέον τοσαύτην δύναμιν. ἔστω

γὰρ τὸ γενέσθαι τοῦ αὐτομάτου. τίνος τὸ τάξαι; καὶ τοῦτο,
εἰ δοκεῖ, δῶμεν. τίνος τὸ τηρῆσαι καὶ φυλάξαι καθ’ οὓς
πρῶτον ὑπέστη λόγους; ἑτέρου τινός, ἢ τοῦ αὐτομάτου;
ἑτέρου δηλαδὴ παρὰ τὸ αὐτόματον. τοῦτο δὲ τί ποτε
ἄλλο πλὴν θεός; οὕτως ὁ ἐκ θεοῦ λόγος, καὶ πᾶσι σύμφυτος,

καὶ πρῶτος ἐν ἡμῖν νόμος, καὶ πᾶσι συνημμένος, ἐπὶ
θεὸν ἡμᾶς ἀνήγαγεν ἐκ τῶν ὁρωμένων. καὶ δὴ λέγωμεν
ἀρξάμενοι πάλιν.

 

Θεόν, ὅ τί ποτε μέν ἐστι τὴν φύσιν καὶ τὴν οὐσίαν,
οὔτε τις εὗρεν ἀνθρώπων πώποτε, οὔτε μὴ εὕρῃ. ἀλλ’ εἰ

μὲν εὑρήσει ποτέ, ζητείσθω τοῦτο καὶ φιλοσοφείσθω
παρὰ τῶν βουλομένων. εὑρήσει δέ, ὡς ἐμὸς λόγος, ἐπειδὰν
τὸ θεοειδὲς τοῦτο καὶ θεῖον, λέγω δὲ τὸν ἡμέτερον νοῦν
τε καὶ λόγον, τῷ οἰκείῳ προσμίξῃ, καὶ ἡ εἰκὼν ἀνέλθῃ
πρὸς τὸ ἀρχέτυπον, οὗ νῦν ἔχει τὴν ἔφεσιν. καὶ τοῦτο


1 αγον...ακωλυτον] ὕπο τὴν ἄληκτον φορὰν καὶ ἀκώλυτον ἄγαγον ‘Reg.
Cypr.’ || 10 om συμφυτος...και πάσι b || 12 λέγωμεν] -ομεν be


2. λόγον ἐνθείς] Gr. does not
mean (like Plato) that the universe
is conscious of the law by which it
acts.


3. διεξάγεται] seems simply to
mean ‘is conducted.’ Cp. in
i 12 διὰ κύκλου τινὸς εὐθύνων καἰ διεφτητι
ἄγων τὸν ἀπάντα κόσμον.


5. τῷ αὐτομάτω ‘to chance.’


10. πᾶσι σύμφυτος] notexactly =
ἔμφυτος, but ‘naturally bound up
with’; like συνημμένος (from
τειν) just after.


17. Hereafter we shall know as
we are known; here, the most privileged
attain to a knowledge which is
only relatively great.


15. ἀλλ’ εἰ μέν] but whether man
will ever find.’


19. τῷ οἰκείῳ] ‘with that to wh
it belongs’: Vaughan's ‘spirits
fair kindred ’ Cp. § 12 sub
fin.




εἶναί μοι δοκεῖ τὸ πάνυ φιλοσοφούμενον, ἐπιγνώσεσθαί
ποτε ἡμᾶς, ὅσον ἐγνώσμεθα. τὸ δὲ νῦν εἶναι βραχεῖά τις
ἀπορροὴ πᾶν τὸ εἰς ἡμᾶς φθάνον, καὶ οἷον μεγάλου φωτὸς
μικρὸν ἀπαύγασμα. ὥστε καὶ εἴ τις ἔγνω θεόν, ἢ ἐγνωκέναι

μεμαρτύρηται, τοσοῦτον ἔγνω, ὅσον ἄλλου μὴ τὸ ἴσον
ἐλλαμφθέντος φανῆναι φωτοειδέστερος. καὶ τὸ ὑπερβάλλον
τέλειον ἐνομίσθη, οὐ τῇ ἀληθείᾳ, τῇ δὲ τοῦ πλησίον
δυνάμει παραμετρούμενον.

 

Διὰ τοῦτο Ἐνὼς μὲν ἤλπισεν ἐπικαλεῖσθαι τὸν

κύριον· ἐλπὶς τὸ κατορθούμενον ἦν, καὶ τοῦτο οὐ γνώσεως,
ἀλλ’ ἐπικλήσεως. Ἑνὼχ δὲ μετετέθη μέν, οὔπω δὲ δῆλον,
εἰ θεοῦ φύσιν περιλαβών, ἢ περιληψόμενος. τοῦ δὲ Νῶε
καλὸν ἡ εὐαρέστησις, τοῦ καὶ κόσμον ὅλον ἐξ ὑδάτων
διασώσασθαι πιστευθέντος, ἢ κόσμου σπέρματα, ξύλῳ

μικρῷ φεύγοντι τὴν ἐπίκλυσιν. Ἀβραὰμ δὲ ἐδικαιώθη
μὲν ἐκ πίστεως, ὁ μέγας πατριάρχης, καὶ θύει θυσίαν
ξένην καὶ τῆς μεγάλης ἀντίτυπον· θεὸν δὲ οὐχ ὡς θεὸν
εἶδεν, ἀλλ’ ὡς ἄνθρωπον ἔθρεψε, καὶ ἐπῃνέθη, σεβασθεὶς

17. 2 εἶναι] γνῶναι ‘Coisl. 3 tres Colb.’ 18. 15 φευγοντι] φυγοντι b ||
18 ως] ὡσπερ df


1. τὸ πάνυ φίλος.] ‘the great
dictum.’ 1 Cor. xiii 12.


2. τὸ δὲ νῦν εἶναι] ’for
being.’ Elias comments on the ’Attic
idiom,’ and compares the way in
which εἶναι is used with ἑκών.


3. φθάνον εἰς, ‘reaches.’

Enos, Enoch, Noe, Abraham,
Facob, though so highly favoured,
never saw God ἃς God.


9. ἤλπισεν] Gen. iv 26 (LXX.)
οὗτος ἤλπισεν ἐπικ. τὸ ὄνομα κυρίου
τοῦ θεοῦ. Even to call upon His
name was beyond the present powers
of Enos: he only succeeded τὸ
κατορθ.) in hoping to do it. Ἐπικ.
is of course active in meaning.


11. μετετέθη] Gen. v 24; cp.
Wisd. iv 10. This implied high
favour with God μέν), but it did
not of itself prove οὔπω) that E.
had either attained, or would ever
attain, an adequate knowledge
the time the divine nature.


13. εὐαρέστησις] Gen. vi9
Kαλόν, constr. like triste lupus
stabulis.


14. δίας. πιστευθέντος] ‘entrusted
with the duty of saving.’


15. ἐδικαιώθη] Gen. xv 6.


16. θυσίαν θυσίαν Gen. xxii 13.
‘Strange,’ because miraculously
supplied. It is prob. that Gr.
means the ram, rather than Isaac;
for Basil also makes the ram a type
of Christ (de Spir. S. 14, p. 319 D).


18. ἔθρεψε] Gen. xviii 8. Although
the detail is taken only from ’s
history, the restriction is intended to
apply also to Noe.


ib. ἐπῃνέθη] Perh. Gen. xviii
17 foil.




ὅσον κατέλαβεν. Ἰακὼβ δὲ κλίμακα μὲν ὑψηλὴν ἐφαντάσθη
τινά, καὶ ἀγγέλων ἄνοδον, καὶ στήλην ἀλείφει
μυστικῶς, ἴσως ἵνα τὸν ὑπὲρ ἡμῶν ἀλειφθέντα λίθον παραδηλώσῃ,
καὶ Εἶδος Θεοῦ τόπῳ τινὶ προσηγορίαν δίδωσιν
εἰς τιμὴν τοῦ ὀφθέντος, καὶ ὡς ἀνθρώπῳ τῷ θεῷ προσπαλαίει,

ἥτις ποτέ ἐστιν ἡ πάλη θεοῦ πρὸς ἄνθρωπον,
ἢ τάχα τῆς ἀνθρωπίνης ἀρετῆς πρὸς θεὸν ἀντεξέτασις,
καὶ σύμβολα τῆς πάλης ἐπὶ τοῦ σώματος φέρει, τὴν ἧτταν
παραδεικνύντα τῆς γενητῆς φύσεως, καὶ ἆθλον εὐσεβείας
τὴν μεταβολὴν τῆς προσηγορίας λαμβάνει, μετονομασθεὶς

ἀντὶ Ἰακὼβ Ἰσραήλ, τοῦτο δὴ τὸ μέγα καὶ τίμιον ὄνομα·
ἐκεῖνο δὲ οὔτε αὐτὸς οὔτε τις ὑπὲρ αὐτὸν μέχρι σήμερον
ἐκαυχήσατο τῶν δώδεκα δώδεκα φυλῶν, ὧν πατὴρ ἦν, ὅτι θεοῦ
φύσιν ἢ ὄψιν ὅλην ἐχώρησεν.

 

Ἡλία δὲ οὔτε πνεῦμα βίαιον, οὔτε πῦρ, οὔτε

συσσεισμός, ὡς τῆς ἱστορίας ἀκούεις, ἀλλ’ ἡ αὔρα τις

3 ἀλειφθέντα] αλειφεντα aedf: αλιφεντα e || 4 Ειδος] οἶκος El: ἴσω f ||
9 γενητης] γεννήτης def ǁ I4 η ὄψιν ὅλην] ὅλην ὄψις (om 77) e: om ὅλην df


1. κλίμακα] Gen. xxviii 12.
ib. ἐφαντάσθη] ‘saw in a vision.’


3. λίθον] Is. xxviii 16 etc.;
ἀλειφθ. Is. lxi 1 ἔχρισεν) etc.


4. Εἶδος Θ] Gen. xxxii 30 (31).
This reading has better authority
than οἶκος θ., i.e. Bethel. On
the other hand τοῦ ὀφθ. seems more
like a reminiscence of Gen. xxxv 1,9
(in u. 7 the word is ἐπεφάνη); and
perh. it might have been more
natural to mention the name of
Penuel after the mention of the
wrestling.


6. ἥτις π. ἐ.] The whole clause
forms a cogn. ace. after προσπαλ.,
‘wrestles whatever wrestling that of
God with man may be.’


7. ἢ τάχα] ‘or perhaps (it would
be best to say) the trial,’ etc. He
this turn, because God was
not ’wrestling’ for the mastery, but
to try the ἀρετή of Jacob.


8. σύμβολα] Gen. xxxii 31 (32).


12. ἐκεῖνο δέ] refers to what follows,
lows, ὅτι θ. φύσιν κτλ. The δὲ
the apodosis to κλίμακα μέν.


ib. ὑπὲρ αὐτόν] Jacob was excelled
by some of his descendants,
but none of them could ’make room
for’ (χωρεῖν), ‘take in,’ or perh.
‘bear,’ the whole of God.


19. Elias, Esaias, Ezekiel, and
others, were unable to receive the
revelation of the Divine nature in
itself.


16. ἢ αὔρα τις ὁ] 1 Kings xix 12
φωνὴ αὔρας λεπτῆς. The τις hints
that there was something more than
usual in ‘that breeze.’ Gr.’s agrument
implies that if the presence
had been discerned in the mightier
movements of nature, God might
have been thought to manifest
self wholly in them, but that it was
impossible to imagine this in connexion
with the ‘small breeze.’




ὀλίγη τὴν τοῦ θεοῦ παρουσίαν, καὶ ταῦτα οὐ φύσιν,
ἐσκιαγράφησεν· Ἠλίᾳ τίνι; ὃν καὶ ἅρμα πυρὸς ἀνάγει
πρὸς οὐρανόν, δηλοῦν τοῦ δικαίου τὸ ὑπὲρ ἄνθρωπον.
Μανωὲ δὲ τὸν κριτὴν πρότερον, καὶ Πέτρον τὸν μαθητὴν

ὕστερον, πῶς οὐ τεθαύμακας; τὸν μὲν οὐδὲ ὄψιν φέροντα
τοῦ φαντασθέντος θεοῦ, καὶ διὰ τοῦτο, Ἀπολώλαμεν, ὦ
γύναι, λέγοντα, θεὸν ἑωράκαμεν· ὡς οὐ χωρητῆς οὔσης
ἀνθρώποις οὐδὲ φαντασίας θείας, μὴ ὅτι γε φύσεως· τὸν
δὲ καὶ τὸν φαινόμενον χριστὸν τῷ πλοίῳ μὴ προσιέμενον,

καὶ διὰ τοῦτο ἀποπεμπόμενον. καίτοιγε θερμότερος τῶν
ἄλλων εἰς ἐπίγνωσιν Χριστοῦ Πέτρος, καὶ διὰ τοῦτο μακαριζόμενος,
καὶ τὰ μέγιστα πιστευόμενος. τί δ’ ἂν εἴποις
περὶ Ἠσαίου, καὶ Ἰεζεχιὴλ τοῦ τῶν μεγίστων ἐπόπτου, καὶ
τῶν λοιπῶν προφητῶν; ὧν ὁ μὲν τὸν κύριον Σαβαὼθ

εἶδε καθήμενον ἐπὶ θρόνου δόξης, καὶ τοῦτον ὑπὸ τῶν
ἑξαπτερύγων σεραφὶμ κυκλούμενον καὶ αἰνούμενον καὶ
ἀποκρυπτόμενον, ἑαυτόν τε τῷ ἄνθρακι καθαιρόμενον, καὶ
πρὸς τὴν προφητείαν καταρτιζόμενον· ὁ δὲ καὶ τὸ ὄχημα
τοῦ θεοῦ τὰ Χερουβὶμ διαγράφει, καὶ τὸν ὑπὲρ αὐτῶν

θρόνον, καὶ τὸ ὑπὲρ αὐτοῦ στερέωμα, καὶ τὸν ἐν τῷ

19. 2 ἐσκιαγράφησεν] εσκιογρ. a || 6 om καὶ f || 10 καίτοιγε] καίτοι c ||
16 om ἑξαπτερύγων d || 17 ἀποκρυπτόμενον] κρυπτομένων c: κρυπτόμενον f
‘Colb. 1 Or. I’ || 19 ἀυτῶν] αὐτοῦ ‘Reg. Cypr.’


1. καὶ ταῦτα] used like καὶ τοῦτο,
‘and that without shadowing forth
His nature.’ If Gr. had meant ταῦτα
= τὴν παρουσίαν, he must have said
ταύτην.


2 Ἠλ. τίνι;] ‘and what Elias?’ 
i.e. what was he?


4. τὸν κριτήν] M. is not so styled
in the book itself.


6. ἀπολώλαμεν] Judg. xiii 22—a a
free version. But as Gr. quotes the
words in precisely the same form in
Or. ix 1, it is possible that he may
have found them so in some text.


8. μὴ ὅτι] Cp. ἑ 11.


9. τῷ πλοίῳ μὴ προσι.] Luke v 8.
Gr. seems to have forgotten that
Christ was in the boat.


11. μακαριζόμενος] Matt, xvi 17
foil.


15 καθήμενον ἐπὶ θ. δ] Is. vi 1
(δόξης seems to come from Matt.
xxv 31).


17. ἀποκρυπτόμενον.] This is Gr.'s
addition to the narrative, unless he
means ‘hidden from themselves’
the Seraphim. It is indeed possible
that he understood πρόσωπον, πόδας,
in Isaiah, to be those of the Lord.’


ib. ἑαυτόν τε] ‘and saw himself.’


18. τὸ ὄχημα] Ezek. i 4. It is
not actually described by that name.




στερεώματι φανταζόμενον, καἰ φωνὰς δή τινας, καὶ ὁρμάς, καὶ
πράξεις, καὶ ταῦτα εἴτε φαντασία τις ἢν ἡμερινή, μόνοις
θεωρητὴ τοῖς ἁγίοις, εἴτε νυκτὸς ἀψευδὴς ὄψις, εἴτε τοῦ
ἡγεμονικοῦ τύπωσις συγγινομένη τοῖς μέλλουσιν ὡς παροῦσιν,
εἴτε τι ἄλλο προφητείας εἶδος ἀπόρρητον, οὐκ ἔχω

λέγειν· ἁλλ’ οἶδεν ὁ τῶν προφητῶν θεός, καὶ οἱ τὰ τοιαῦτα
ἐνεργούμενοι. πλὴν οὔτε οὗτοι περὶ ὧν ὁ λόγος, οὔτε τις
ἄλλος τῶν κατ’ αὐτούς, ἔστη ἐν ὑποστήματι καὶ οὐσία
κυρίου, κατὰ τὸ γεγραμμένον, οὐδὲ θεοῦ φύσιν ἢ εἶδεν
ἢ ἐξηγόρευσεν.

 

Παύλῳ δὲ εἰ μὲν ἔκφορα ἦν ἃ παρέσχεν ὁ τρίτος
οὐρανός, καὶ ἡ μέχρις ἐκείνου πρόοδος ἢ ἀνάβασις ἢ
ἀνάληψις, τάχα ἄν τι περὶ θεοῦ πλέον ἔγνωμεν, εἴπερ
τοῦτο ἢν τὸ τῆς ἁρπαγῆς μυστήριον. ἐπεὶ δὲ ἄρρητα ἦν,
καὶ ἡμῖν σιωπῇ τιμάσθω. τοσοῦτον δὲ ἀκούσωμεν αὐτοῦ

Παύλου λέγοντος, ὅτι ἐκ μέρους γινώσκομεν, καὶ ἐκ μέρους
προφητεύομεν. ταῦτα καὶ τὰ τοιαῦτα ὁμολογεῖ ὁ μὴ
ἰδιώτης τὴν γνῶσιν, ὁ δοκιμὴν ἀπειλῶν τοῦ ἐν αὐτῷ

4 συηινομενη] συγγενομένη def: συγγενομένου ‘Or. ’ ǁ 8 κατ’ αυτους]
κάτα τούτους ac ‘duo Reg. Or. I’ 20. 11 α παρεσχεν] ἅπερ ἔσχεν d ||
15 ακουσωμεν] σομεν f


1. φωνάς] Ezek. i 24, 28; ὁρμάς,
i 19 foil.; πράξεις, ii 9.


3. τοῦ ἥγ’. τύπωσις] ‘an impres-
sion upon the rational ’ Ἡγμε.,
i 3. Συγγινομένη by a very natural
hyperbaton for νου.


6. οἱ τὰ τ. ἐνεργ] ‘those upon
whom such effects are ’ wrought.


8. τῶν κατ’ αὐτούς] ‘those of their
sort.


ib. ἵστη ἐν ὑποστ.] Jer. xxiii 18.
Ὑπόστ. is ‘an establishment’ of some
kind; in 2 Sam. xxiii 14 of ‘a garri-
son’; in Jer. prob. ‘a court,’ or
‘familiar circle.’ Gr. however
curiously misunderstood the word
to = ὑπόστασις in the sense of οὐσία
(cp. § 9).


20. St Paul only saw through α
glass] in α riddle.


11. ἔκφορα] ‘capable of being di-
vulged’; cp. Plat. Lack. 201 A ῾Ο τρ.
οὐρ., 2 Cor. xii 2.


12. πρόοδος] nom. to ἢν, not to
παρέσχεν. He calls it a πρόοδος to
signify that it represented a progress
in St P.'s spiritual experience, and
not merely an incidental privilege.
Cp. v 26.


13. etirtp τοῦτο] Gr. will not
even admit that we can be sure that
St P. thereby became acquainted
with the Divine nature. The ἁρπαγῆ
was in the strictest sense a
μυστήριον.


16. ἐκ μέρους] 1 Cor. xiii 9.


17. μὴ ἰδ’. τὴν γνῶσιν] 2 Cor.
xi 6.


18. δοκιμὴν ἀπ.] 2 Cor. xiii 3.




λαλοῦντος χριστοῦ, ὁ μέγας τῆς ἀληθείας προαγωνιστὴς
καὶ διδάσκαλος· καὶ πᾶσαν τὴν κάτω γνῶσιν οὐδὲν ὑπὲρ
τὰ ἔσοπτρα καὶ τὰ αἰνίγματα τίθεται, ὡς ἐν μικροῖς τῆς
ἀληθείας ἱσταμένην ἰνδάλμασιν. εἰ δὲ μὴ λίαν δοκῶ

τισὶ περιττὸς καὶ περίεργος τὰ τοιαῦτα ἐξετάζων, οὐδὲ
ἄλλα τινὰ τυχὸν ἢ ταῦτα ἦν, ἃ μὴ δύναται νῦν βασταχθῆναι,
ἅπερ ὁ Λόγος αὐτὸς ὑπῃνίσσετο, ὥς ποτε βασταχθησόμενα
καὶ τρανωθησόμενα· καὶ ἃ μηδ’ ἂν αὐτὸν δυνηθῆναι
χωρῆσαι τὸν κάτω κόσμον Ἰωάννης ὁ τοῦ Λόγου πρόδρομος

ἡ μεγάλη τῆς ἀληθείας φωνή, διωρίζετο.

 

Πᾶσα μὲν οὖν ἀλήθεια καὶ πᾶς λόγος δυστέκμαρτός
τε καὶ δυσθεώρητος· καὶ οἷον ὀργάνῳ μικρῷ μεγάλα
δημιουργοῦμεν, τῆ ἀνθρωπτίνῃ σοφίᾳ τὴν τῶν ὄντων γνῶσιν
θηρεύοντες, καὶ τοῖς νοητοῖς προσβάλλοντες μετὰ τῶν

αἰσθήσεων, ἢ οὐκ ἄνευ αἰσθήσεων, ὑφ’ ὧν περιφερόμεθα
καὶ πλανώμεθα, καὶ οὐκ ἔχομεν γυμνῷ τῷ νοὶ γυμνοῖς τοῖς
πράγμασιν ἐντυγχάνοντες μᾶλλόν τι προσιέναι τῇ ἀληθείᾳ,
καὶ τὸν νοῦν τυποῦσθαι ταῖς καταλήψεσιν. ὁ δὲ περὶ
θεοῦ λόγος, ὅσῳ τελεώτερος, τοσούτῳ δυσεφικτότερος, καὶ

πλείους τὰς ἀντιλήψεις ἔχων καὶ τὰς λύσεις ἐργωδεστέρας.

2 καὶ πάσαν] διὸ καὶ πάσαν e: ο καὶ ‘Reg. a duo Colb.’ || 4 ἱσταμένην]
e ǁ 7 om ἅπερ d || ὡς] ισως ‘Reg. Cypr.’ || 8 α] ἅπερ d ΙΙ 9 om κάτω def
21. 14 προσβάλλοντες] προβ. c2 || 15 περιφερομεθα και πλανώμεθα] περιπλανωμεθα
καὶ περιφερόμεθα f


3. ἔσοπτρα κ. τ. αἰν.] 1 Cor.
xiii 12.


4. ἰνδάλμασιν] ‘figures,’ ‘repre-
sentations.’


5. περιττὸς κ. περίεργ.] Cp. i 1.


7. ὑπῃνίσσετο ‘darkly intimated’;
in John xvi 12.


8. τρανωθησόμενα] Cp. § 4.


9. χωρῆσαι τὸν κ.] John xxi 25.
By a strange oversight, Gr. confounds
the Forerunner with the
Divine. φωνή, perh. with ref. to
John i 23.


10. διωρίζετο] ‘to define’; so ‘to
affirm.’


21. All abstract ruth is hard
to attain with such instruments as
we possess, but above all the truth
about God. So Solomon and St Panl
confessed; and David, who despaired
of knowing even himself.


14. προσβάλλοντες] Cp. § 16.
Μετὰ τῶν αἰ., cp. §§ 12 § 26.


18. τὸν νοῦν τυπ. τ. κατ.] ‘to have
our minds fashioned by what we
perceive.’


19. δυσεφικτ.] ‘harder to come at’
(ἐφικνεῖσθαι).


20. ἀντιλήψεις] From the general
notion of ‘catching hold’ of a thing
come the opposite meanings of
’helping’ (e.g. 1 Cor. xii 28), and
(as here) of ‘objections,’ ‘difficulties.’
Plut. de Def. Orac. (11 438 D) has
the expression ὡς ἔχοντα πολλὰς ἀντιλήψεις
καὶ ὑπονοίας πρὸς τοὐναντίον.




πᾶν γὰρ τὸ ἐνιστάμενον, κἂν βραχύτατον ἦ, τὸν τοῦ λόγου
δρόμον ἐπέσχε καὶ διεκώλυσε, καὶ τὴν εἰς τὸ πρόσω φορὰν
διέκοψεν· ὥσπερ οἱ τοὺς ἵππους τοῖς ῥυτῆρσιν ἀθρόως
μεθέλκοντες φερομένους, καὶ τῷ ἀδοκήτῳ τοῦ τιναγμοῦ
περιτρέποντες. οὕτω Σολομὼν μέν, ὁ σοφισάμενος περισσὰ

ὑπὲρ πάντας τοὺς γενομένους ἔμπροσθεν καὶ καθ’ ἑαυτόν,
ᾧ τὸ τῆς καρδίας πλάτος δῶρον θεοῦ, καὶ ἡ ψάμμου
δαψιλεστέρα χύσις τῆς θεωρίας, ὅσῳ πλέον ἐμβατεύει
τοῖς βάθεσι, τοσούτῳ πλέον ἰλιγγιᾷ, καὶ τέλος τι ποιεῖται
σοφίας εὑρεῖν ὅσον διέφυγεν. Παῦλος δὲ πειρᾶται μὲν

ἐφικέσθαι, οὔπω λέγω τῆς τοῦ θεοῦ φύσεως, τοῦτο γὰρ
ᾔδει παντελῶς ἀδύνατον ὄν, ἀλλὰ μόνον τῶν τοῦ θεοῦ
κριμάτων· ἐπεὶ δὲ οὐχ εὑρίσκει διέξοδον οὐδὲ στάσιν τῆς
ἀναβάσεως, οὐδὲ εἴς τι φανερὸν τελευτᾷ πέρας ἡ πολυπραγμοσύνη
τῆς διανοίας, ἀεί τινος ὑποφαινομένου τοῦ

λείποντος· ὢ τοῦ θαύματος ἵνα καὶ αὐτὸς πάθω τὸ ἴσον)·
ἐκπλήξει περιγράφει τὸν λόγον, καὶ πλοῦτον θεοῦ καὶ

11 οὔπω] + δε e || 12 om ὂν c || μόνον] μόνων c2e ǁ 14 πολυπραγμοσύνη]
+ τῃ e


1. ἐνιστάμενον] ‘obstruction.’


2. ἐπέσχε κτλ.] ‘gnomic’ aorists:
‘it lets and hinders.’


3. ῥυτῆρσιν] ‘reins’: ἀθρόως,
suddenly, cp § 2.


5. σοφισάμενος] 1 Kings iv 31
(LXX. 111 Kings iv 27 Swete) ascent never stops,’ i.e. i
ἐσοφίσατο virkp π.


6. τοὺς γεν. ἔμπροσθεν] 1 Kings
iii 12. Καθ’ ἑαυτόν might be (as in
§ 19) ‘after his pattern’; but the
connexion is in favour of
‘in his time.’


7. καρδίας πλάτος] 1 Kings iv 29
(iv 25 Swete). Sw. reads χύμα
καρδίας; and Gr.'s χύσις directly
after seems to show that he read
the same, πλάτος being his interpretation.
Χύσις, ‘spread,’ ‘expanse.’


9. ἰλιγγιᾷ] ‘reels.’


ib. τέλος τι π. σοφίας] ‘makes it
as it were the end (perfection) of
wisdom to find henv far it ὁ περὶ θ.
λόγος) has escaped him.’ Gr. refers
to such passages as Eccl. vii 23 foll.,
viii 17, and perh. xii 12 foll.


13. κριμάτων] Rom. xi 33.


ib. στάσιν τῆς ἀν.] ‘that the
ascent never stops,’ i.e. is endless.


15. ἀεί τινος ὑποφ. τ. λ.] lit.
‘something remaining ever dimly
disclosing itself.’


16. ἴνα κ. αὐτός] By his exclamation,
Gr. has dramatically put himself
beside St P.


17. περιγράφει τὸν λ.] ‘He concludes
his discourse with astonishment.’




βάθος τὸ τοιοῦτο καλεῖ, καὶ ὁμολογεῖ τῶν τοῦ θεοῦ
κριμάτων τὸ ἀκατάληπτον, μονονουχὶ τὰ αὐτὰ τῷ Δαβὶδ
φθεγγόμενος, ποτὲ μὲν ἄβυσσον πολλὴν ὀνομάζοντι τὰ τοῦ
θεοῦ κρίματα, ἦς οὐκ ἔστι τὴν ἕδραν ἢ μέτρῳ ἢ αἰσθήσει

λαβεῖν, ποτὲ δὲ τεθαυμαστῶσθαι τὴν γνῶσιν ἐξ ἑαυτοῦ
καὶ τῆς ἑαυτοῦ συστάσεως λέγοντι, κεκραταιῶσθαί τε
πλέον ἢ κατὰ τὴν ἑαυτοῦ δύναμιν καὶ περίδραξιν.

 

Ἵνα γὰρ τἄλλα ἐάσας, φησί, πρὸς ἐμαυτὸν βλέψω,
καὶ πᾶσαν τὴν ἀνθρωπίνην φύσιν καὶ σύμπηξιν, τίς ἡ

μίξις ἡμῶν; τίς ἡ κίνησις; πῶς τὸ ἀθάνατον τῷ θνητῷ
συνεκράθη; πῶς κάτω ῥέω, καὶ ἄνω φέρομαι; πῶς ψυχὴ
περιγράφεται; πῶς ζωὴν δίδωσι, καὶ πάθους μεταλαμ-
βάνει; πῶς ὁ νοῦς καὶ περιγραπτὸς καὶ ἀόριστος, ἐν ἡμῖν
μένων, καὶ πάντα ἐφοδεύων τάχει φορᾶς καὶ ῥεύσεως; πῶς

μεταλαμβάνεται λόγῳ καὶ μεταδίδοται, καὶ δι᾿ ἀέρος χωρεῖ,
καὶ μετὰ τῶν πραγμάτων εἰσέρχεται; πῶς αἰσθήσει

6 ἑαυτοῦ] αὐτοῦ ce 22. 8 γὰρ] ’δε e || 12 περιγράφεται] περιφέρεται ac


1. τὸ τοιοῦτο] ‘such a thing,’
i.e. the field which his mind surveys.


3. ἄβυσσον π.] Ps. xxxvi 6
(xxxv 7). By ἕδρα Gr. seems to
mean the ‘bottom.’


5. τεθαυμ] Ps. exxxviii (exxxix)
6. ‘That That the knowledge even of his
own constitution was too wonderful
for him.’ It is possible, however,
that Gr. misunderstood the ἐξ to
mean that it was the contemplation of
his constitution which
made the knowledge of God seem
overwhelming.


6. κεκρατ.] ibid. ἐκραταιώθη, οὐ
μὴ δύνωμαι πρὸς αὐτήν. Περίδρ.,
‘grasp.’


22. Well might David despair;
for how marvellous is man's constitutuion,—his
birth, his sustenance,
his instincts, his continuity, his very
organs and the media in which they
act, a microcosm in himself.


8. φησι] sc. David.


11. κάτω ῥέω] by decay and death:
ἄνω φ., prob. Gr. means by contemveys.
ib. ψυχή] without the art., points
the contrast between the nature of
the soul and its limitations. Περιγράφεται,
because confined in the
body;


12. ζωὴν δίδ] sc. to the body;
and yet it receives from the body a
share in its πάθη.


13. ἀόριστος] Though our intelligence
works within limits, those
limits are themselves capable of indifinite
extension.


14. ἐφοδεύων] ‘visiting.’


15. δι’ ἀέρος χ.] Perh. by means
of speech.


16. μετὰ τῶν πρ.] Intelligence
‘enters in with the things
us, because we learn by them.
is further expressed by αἰσθ. κοιν.;
it is ’in partnership with sense,’
though capable of withdrawing itself
from the senses.




κοινωνεῖ, καὶ συστέλλεται ἀπὸ τῶν αἰσθήσεων; καὶ ἔτι
πρὸ τούτων, τίς ἡ πρώτη πλάσις ἡμῶν καὶ σύστασις ἐν
τῷ τῆς φύσεως ἐργαστηρίῳ; καὶ τίς ἡ τελευταία μόρφωσις
καὶ τελείωσις; τίς ἡ τῆς τροφῆς ἔφεσις καὶ διάδοσις; καὶ
τίς ἤγαγεν ἐπὶ τὰς πρώτας πηγὰς καὶ τοῦ ζῆν ἀφορμὰς

αὐτομάτως; πῶς σιτίοις μὲν σῶμα, λόγῳ δὲ ψυχὴ τρέφεται;
τίς ἡ τῆς φύσεως ὁλκὴ καὶ πρὸς ἄλληλα σχέσις
τοῖς γεννῶσι καὶ τοῖς γέννω μένοις, ἵνα τῷ φίλτρῳ συνέ-
χηται; πῶς ἑστηκότα τε τὰ εἴδη καὶ τοῖς χαρακτῆρσι
διεστηκότα, ὧν τοσούτων ὄντων αἱ ἰδιότητες ἀνέφικτοι;

πῶς τὸ αὐτὸ ζῶον θνητὸν καὶ ἀθάνατον, τὸ μὲν τῇ μεταστάσει,
τὸ δὲ τῇ γεννήσει; τὸ μὲν γὰρ ὑπεξῆλθε, τὸ δὲ
ἀντεισῆλθεν, ὥσπερ ἐν ὁλκῷ ποταμοῦ μὴ ἑστῶτος καὶ
μένοντος. πολλὰ δ’ ἂν ἔτι φιλοσοφήσαις περὶ μελῶν καὶ
μερῶν, καὶ τῆς πρὸς ἄλληλα τούτων εὐαρμοστίας, πρὸς


2 πλάσις ἤμων καὶ σύστασις] σύστασις ἤμων df || 9 χαρακτῆρσι] + τὰ f ǁ
10 διεστηκότα] + καὶ e ǁ 11 μεταστάσει] μεταποιήσει ‘Reg. Cypr.’ || 14 φιλοσο-
φησαις]σπερμολογήσαις b ‘Coisl. 2’


2. ἐν τῷ τῆς φ. ἐργ.] ‘in nature's
laboratory? the mother's womb.


3. τελευταία μ.] ‘the finishing
touch,’ sc. before birth.


4. ἔφεσις κ. διάδοσις] the instinct
which impels the babe to seek its
nourishment, and the provision (lit.
‘distribution’) which supplies the
need.


5. ἀφορμάς] ’means’: of course
the breast is meant. Αὐτομάτως,
‘instinctively.’


7. ὁλκὴ] ‘attraction,’ from ἕλκειν.
Ἵνα is not used here in a ‘final’
sense. Cp. § 7.


8. ουνέχηται] sc τὰ γεννῶντα κ.
τὰ γεννώμενα.


9. etSrj] ’forms.’ How, Gr. asks,
is the common form so constant
while appearing with such a variety
of distinguishing features; and in
all that variety the peculiarities of
each individual remain untouched,
so that no two men are exactly
alike?


11. τὸ αὐτὸ ζῶον] ‘animal’ for
‘kind of animal’; as we talk of
’the ’ ’the ’ Gr. is speaking
of the deathless persistence of the
species, not of the restored existence
of the specimen. His wonder is
that the type endures. It never
passes into another ζῶον. Μετα-
στάσει, ‘removal’ by death.


12. ὑπεξῆλθε] gnomic aor.


13. ὁλκῷ] There seems to be no
instance of ὁλκός=ὁλκή, which might
mean the flow or current of the river.
Suidas gives an interpretation ὁδὸς
ἢ ἀγωγὸς ῥεύματος, and quotes the
phrase rbv ὁλκὸν τοῦ ὕδατος ἔκοψεν.
Here then it would mean ‘as in the
channel of a river, which (river)
never stands still, yet is ever there.’
This is in accordance with the
common meaning of ὁ. = sulcus.




χρείαν τε ὁμοῦ καὶ κάλλος συνεστώτων τε καὶ διεστώτων,
προεχόντων τε καὶ προεχομένων, ἑνουμένων τε καὶ σχιζομένων,
περιεχόντων τε καὶ περιεχομένων, νόμῳ καὶ λόγῳ
φύσεως. πολλὰ περὶ φωνῶν καὶ ἀκοῶν· πῶς αἱ μὲν

φέρονται διὰ τῶν φωνητικῶν ὀργάνων, αἱ δὲ ὑποδέχονται,
διὰ τῆς ἐν μέσῳ τοῦ ἀέρος πληγῆς καὶ τυπώσεως ἀλλήλαις
ἐπιμιγνύμεναι. πολλὰ περὶ ὄψεως ἀρρήτως κοινωνούσης
τοῖς ὁρατοῖς, καὶ μόνῳ τῷ βούλεσθαι καὶ ὁμοῦ κινουμένης,
καὶ ταὐτὸν τῷ νοὶ πασχούσης· μετὰ γὰρ τοῦ ἴσου τάχους

ἐκεῖνός τε μίγνυται τοῖς νοουμένοις καὶ αὕτη τοῖς ὁρωμένοις.
πολλὰ περὶ τῶν ἄλλων αἰσθήσεων, αἳ παραδοχαί τινές
εἰσι τῶν ἔξωθεν, λόγῳ μὴ θεωρούμεναι. πολλὰ περὶ τῆς
ἐν ὕπνοις ἀναπαύσεως, καὶ τῆς δι’ ὀνειράτων ἀναπλάσεως,
μνήμης μὴς τε καὶ ἀναμνήσεως, λογισμοῦ τε καὶ θυμοῦ καὶ

ἐφέσεως, καὶ συντόμως εἰπεῖν, ὅσοις ὁ μικρ·ὸς οὗτος κόσμος
διοικεῖται, ὁ ἄνθρωπος.


5 ὑποδέχονται] υπηχουνται b || 12 λόγω λόγων ‘Reg. Cypr.’ ||
+ δε e || 15 οὕτος κόσμος διοικεῖται] κόσμος οὕτος διοικ. e: οὕτος διοικ. κόσμος f


1. συνεστ. τε κ. διεστ.] ‘coordinated
and differentiated tvith a view
alike to use and beauty.'


2. προεχόντων τε κ. πρ.] ‘projecting
and retreating? lit. ‘projecting
and projected beyond?


ib. ἐν. τε κ. σχιζ.] ‘united and
divided? as e.g. the two eyes.
Περιεχ. τε κ. περιεχ., the latter,
of course, would be the internal
the former the part of the
body which encloses them.


3. λόγῳ Φ. Cp. § 16 λόγον
ἐνθείς. For νόμ. cp. Greg. Nyss.
in Diem Nat. Chr. οὐ δουλεύει
φύσεως νόμοις ὁ δεσπότης τῆς φύσεως.


5. ὑποδέχονται] ’, αἱ
ἀκοαί = τὰ ὦτα.


8. μόνω τῷ βούλ. κιλ.] ‘moved
by the will alone, and along with it,
and enjoying the same privilege ἃς
the intelligence? Sight acts, in Gr. 's
opinion, as swiftly as will and
thought.


11. παραδοχαί] From the addi
tion of τινές, we see that the word
bore some half-technical sense, of
which the Lexica do not speak.
Prob. δοχαί, ὑποδοχαί, ‘receptacles.’


12. λόγῳ μὴ θεωρ.] Gr. seems
to mean that the senses, which are
so hospitable to the things external
to ourselves, are yet a mystery imorgans,
penetrable to the reason which
resides within us.


14. μνήμης . . . ἀναμνήσεως] μν. is
the faculty, ἀνάμν. the act of re-
membering. There is a treatise of
Aristotle bearing the title περὶ μνή-
μὴς καὶ ἀναμνήσεως, which doubtless
Gr. has in mind.


15. ὁ μικρὸς οὗτος κ.] On man as
a microcosm, see Plat. Tim. 81 Α
and 88 D. These passages have
been kindly pointed out to me by
Mr Archer-Hind, who adds, “No-
thing like the phrase occurs, but the
conception is plainly there." He
thinks it far from improbable that
Proclus, whose commentary on this
part of the Tim. has not been pre-
served, may have applied the term
μικρὸς κόσμος to the human body;
or that some Stoic writer so applied
it.




 

Βούλει σοι καὶ τὰς τῶν ἄλλων ζώων διαφορὰς
πρός τε ἡμᾶς καὶ πρὸς ἄλληλα, φύσεις τε καὶ γενέσεις καὶ
ἀνατροφάς, καὶ χώρας, καὶ ἤθη, καὶ οἷον πολιτείας καταριθ-
μήσωμαι; πῶς τὰ μὲν ἀγελαῖα, τὰ δὲ μοναδικά; τὰ μὲν
ποηφάγα, τὰ δὲ σαρκοβόρα; τὰ μὲν θυμοειδῆ, τὰ δὲ ἥμερα;

τὰ μὲν φιλάνθρωπα καὶ σύντροφα, τὰ δὲ ἀτίθασσα καὶ
ἐλεύθερα; καὶ τὰ μὲν οἷον ἐγγύτερα λόγου τε καὶ μαθήσεως,
τὰ δὲ παντελῶς ἄλογα καὶ ἀμαθέστατα; τὰ μὲν
πλειόνων αἰσθήσεων, τὰ δὲ ἐλαττόνων; τὰ μὲν ἀκίνητα,
τὰ δὲ μεταβατικά; τὰ μὲν ταχύτατα, τὰ δὲ παχύτατα;

τὰ μὲν ὑπερβάλλοντα μεγέθει καὶ κάλλει ἢ τῷ ἑτέρῳ
τούτων, τὰ δὲ βραχύτατα ἢ δυσειδέστατα ἢ καὶ ἀμΦότερα;
τὰ μὲν ἄλκιμα, τὰ δὲ ἀσθενῆ; τὰ μὲν ἀμυντικά, τὰ δὲ
ὕποπτα καὶ ἐπίβουλα; τὰ μὲν φυλακτά, τὰ δὲ ἀφύλακτα;
τὰ μὲν φίλεργα καὶ οἰκονομικά, τὰ δὲ παντάπασιν ἀργὰ

καὶ ἀπρονόητα; καὶ ἔτι πρὸ τούτων, πῶς τὰ μὲν ἑρπυστικά,
τὰ δὲ ὄρθια; τὰ μὲν φιλόχωρα, τὰ δὲ ἀμΦίβια; τὰ μὲν
φιλόκαλα, τὰ δὲ ἀκαλλώπιστα; συζυγῆ τε καὶ ἀζυγῆ;

23. 1 διαΦορας] ἀναστροφὰς ’Reg. a' || 3 καταριθμησωμαι] σομαι df:
-σωμεν e || 10 τὰ μὲν ταχύτατα τὰ δε παχυτατα] τὰ μὲν ταχύτατα tantum a:
τὰ μὲν παχυτατα tantum b: τὰ ’δε ταχύτατα tantum cdef || 1 1 και] η e ||
13 τὰ μὲν αλκιμα] τὰ ’δε αλκ. e ΙΙ τὰ μὲν αμυντικα] τὰ ’δε ἁμ. a || 14 om τὰ μὲν
φυλακτὰ bef || 16 ερπιστικα ab: ερπηστικα def || 17 τὰ μὲν φιλόχωρα, τὰ ’δε
φίλ’. c


23. Hcnv wonderful the variety of
the beasts!


6. ἀτίθασσα] or ἀτίθασα, ἵκοι
disposed to be tamed'; ἐλεύθερα, cp.
Job xxxix 5.


17. Φιλόχωρα] ‘attached to a place';
it seems an imperfect antithesis to
ἀμφίβια, but prob. Gr. means that
the latter class are so little attached
to a place that they are indifferent
even to an element.


18. φιλόκαλα] Gr. seems to be
anticipating what he says in § 24
about the peacock; it would not be
easy to point to a quadruped which is
markedly φιλόκαλον unless Gr. refers
to such things as the way in which a
cat washes itself. Isocrates advises
a man to be φιλόκαλος in regard to
his dress, but not καλλωπιστής, which
he says would be περίεργον. Ἀκαλ-
λώπ. cannot mean ‘unadorned,
which would be no antithesis to
Φιλόκ., but ‘not given to adorning
themselves.’




σώφρονά τε καὶ ἀκόλαστα; πολύγονά τε καὶ οὐ πολύΥονα;
μακρόβιά τε καὶ ὀλιγόβια; κάμνοι ἃν ἡμῖν ὁ
τοῖς κατὰ μέρος ἐπεξιών.

 

Σκέψαι μοι καὶ νηκτὴν φύσιν τῶν ὑδάτων διολισθαίνουσαν,

καὶ οἷον ἱπταμένην κατὰ τῆς ὑγρᾶς φύσεως,
καὶ τοῦ μὲν ἰδίου σπῶσαν ἀέρος, τῷ ἡμετέρῳ δὲ κινδυνεύουσαν,
ὥσπερ καὶ ἡμεῖς ἐν τοῖς ὕδασιν· ἤθη τε καὶ
πάθη, καὶ μίξεις καὶ γονάς, καὶ μεγέθη καὶ κάλλη, Φιλοχωρίας
τε καὶ πλάνας, συνόδους τε καὶ ἀποχωρήσεις, καὶ

ἰδιότητας μικροῦ τοῖς ἐπιγείοις παραπλησίας, ἔστι δὲ ὧν
καὶ κοινωνίας καὶ ἰδιότητας ἀντιθέτους, ἔν τε εἴδεσι καὶ
ὀνόμασιν. σκέψαι μοι καὶ ὀρνέων ἀγέλας, καὶ ποικιλίας
ἔν τε σχήμασι καὶ χρώμασι, τῶν τε ἄλλων καὶ τῶν
ᾠδικῶν· καὶ τίς τῆς τούτων μελῳδίας ὁ λόγος, καὶ παρὰ

τίνος; τίς ὁ δοὺς τέττιγι τὴν ἐπὶ στήθους μαγάδα, καὶ τὰ
ἐπὶ τῶν κλάδων ᾄσματά τε καὶ τερετίσματα, ὅταν ἡλίῳ
κινῶνται τὰ μεσημβρινὰ μουσουργοῦντες, καὶ καταφωνῶσι
τὰ ἄλση, καὶ ὁδοιπόρον ταῖς φωναῖς παραπέμπωσι; τίς ὁ
κύκνῳ συνυφαίνων τὴν ᾠδήν, ὅταν ἐκπετάσῃ τὸ πτερὸν

ταῖς αὔραις, καὶ ποιῇ μέλος τὸ σύριγμα; ἐῶ γὰρ λέγειν
τὰς βιαίους φωνάς, καὶ ὅσα τέχναι σοφίζονται κατὰ τῆς

24. 9 om ἀποχωρήσεις καὶ ce || 10 om μικροῦ usque ad ἰδιότητας f ||

ὀρνίθων be ’Or. I' || 13 ἄλλων] ἀλάλων df || 17 μουσουργοῦντος e || 18 οδοιπορον] τ8 οδοιπορον]
’τον ὁδ’. c || παραπέμπουσι e || 19 om Tr την cf


24. The fish; the fowl.


4. νηκτὴν φ....διολ.] Cp. ἑ 12.
‘Ιπταμένην ’flying under the liquid
element'; cp. § 16 καθ’ ὕδατος.


6. τοῦ ἰδίου ἁ.] Gr. seems to
mean the water ὥσπερ ἤμ’. ἐν τοῖς
ὕδασι). The gen. is partitive.


10. μικροῦ] ‘nearly'; παραπλ. ‘re-
sembling in number? ’as numerous
as,' — a signification sometimes found
in class, authors; τοῖς ἐπ’. for ταῖς
τῶν ἐπ’.


11. κοινωνίας κοινωνίας κ. ἰδ. ἀντ.] ’common
features, and peculiarities of an op-
posing kind? Elias is prob. right
referring to the differences between
scaly and scaleless, crustaceous and
otherwise.


15. μαγάδα] the ’bridge’ of a
κιθάρα. Gr. treats the τέττιξ as if it
were a bird.


16. τερετίσματα] ‘chirping.' Γᾶ
μεσημβρ. sc. μουσουρΥήματα.


18. παραπέμπωσι] ‘escort.'


20. τὸ σύριγμα] ’ turns his hissing
into a melody.’


21. τὰς βιαίους φ.] ’forced notes';
i.e. the unnatural sounds made by
birds which are taught to speak and
to whistle.




ἀληθείας. πόθεν ταῶς, ὁ ἀλαζὼν ὄρνις καὶ Μηδικός, οὕτω
φιλόκαλος καὶ φιλότιμος, ὥστε (καὶ γὰρ αἰσθάνεται τοῦ
οἰκείου κάλλους), ὅταν ἴδῃ τινὰ πλησιάζοντα, ἢ ταῖς θηλείαις,
ὥς φασι, καλλωπίζηται, τὸν αὐχένα διάρας, καὶ τὸ
πτερὸν κυκλοτερῶς περιστήσας τὸ χρυσαυγὲς καὶ κατάστερον,

θεατρίζει τὸ κάλλος τοῖς ἐρασταῖς μετὰ σοβαροῦ
τοῦ βαδίσματος;


Ἡ μὲν οὖν θεία γραφὴ καὶ γυναικῶν θαυμάζει σοφίαν
τὴν ἐν ὑφάσμασι, Τίς ἔδωκε, λέγουσα, γυναιξὶν ὑφάσματος
σοφίαν καὶ ποικιλτικὴν ἐπιστήμην; ζώου λογικοῦ τοῦτο,

καὶ περιττοῦ τὴν σοφίαν, καὶ μέχρι τῶν οὐρανίων ὁδεύοντος.


 

Σὺ δέ μοι θαύμασον καὶ ἀλόγων φυσικὴν σύνεσιν.
καὶ τοὺς λόγους παράστησον. πῶς μὲν ὄρνισι καλιαὶ
πέτραι τε καὶ δένδρα καὶ ὄροφοι, εἰς ἀσφάλειάν τε ὁμοῦ
καὶ κάλλος ἐξησκημέναι, καὶ τοῖς τρεφομένοις ἐπιτηδείως;

πόθεν δὲ μελίσσαις τε καὶ ἀράχναις τὸ φιλεργὸν
καὶ φιλότεχνον, ἵνα ταῖς μὲν τὰ κηρία πλέκηται καὶ
συνέχηται δι᾿ ἑξαγώνων συρίγγων καὶ ἀντιστρόφων, καὶ τὸ
ἑδραῖον αὐταῖς διὰ τοῦ μέσου διατειχίσματος καὶ ἀλλαγῆς
ἐπιπλεκομένων ταῖς εὐθείαις τῶν γωνιῶν πραγματεύηται,


1 ποθεν + δε e || 2 ωστε] ος c || 3 om η bc || 4 καλλωπιζηται] -ζεται
bcdf || 6 θεατριζει] -ζη b: -ζειν f || 11 ουρανιων] ουρανων ‘in quibusd.’
25. 12 φυσικην] φυσιν και f || συνεσιν] κινησιν b ‘tres Colb.’ || 13 λο-
γους] + ει δυνασαι df

i.e. the unnnatural sounds made by
birds which are taught to speak and
to whistle.

4. τὸ πτερόν] seems to mean ‘his
plumage,’ not ‘wing,’ as above. So
Philostratus says of the peacock, τοῖς
ὀφθαλμοῖς τοῦ πτεροῦ τὴν τῶν ἄστρων
διακόσμησιν ἀναπλάττεται. Kατάστερον
from κατά and ἀστήρ.


6. θεατρίζει] a favourite word of
Gr.’s, but not very common elsewhere,
‘to show off,’ as upon the
stage; cp. Heb. x 33. Σοβαρός,
‘pompous.’


8. καὶ γυναικῶν] Job xxxviii 36
(LXX.). If such skill is wonderful
in women, much more in creatures
without reason, like the foll.


25. The sagacity of animals ; the
bee, the spider, the crane, the ant.


13. καλιαί] ‘bowers’; a poetical
word for ‘nests.’ It is a somewhat
bold phrase to say that they make
rocks and trees their nests. Ἐξησκ.,
cp. § 6 ἠσκ.


18. ἑξ. συρ. κ. ἀντιστρ.] ‘by means
of hexagonal pipes complementary to
each other, and the fabric secured
(lit. the firmness is effected) by means
of the dividing wall and the combi- 
nation
ὁ the angles with the straight
lines.' The ’dividing ’ is perh.
the horizontal one between the upper
and lower set of cells. But cp. Bas.
Hex. viii p. 88 (Paris 1638).




καὶ ταῦτα ἐν ζοφεροῖς οὕτω τοῖς σίμβλοις καὶ ἀοράτοις
τοῖς πλάσμασιν· αἱ δὲ διὰ λεπτῶν οὕτω καὶ ἀερίων σχεδὸν
τῶν νημάτων πολυειδῶς διατεταμένων πολυπλόκους τοὺς
ἱστοὺς ἐξυφαίνωσι, καὶ ταῦτα ἐξ ἀφανῶν τῶν ἀρχῶν,

οἴκησίν τε ὁμοῦ τιμίαν, καὶ θήραν τῶν ἀσθενεστέρων εἰς
τροφῆς ἀπόλαυσιν; ποῖος Εὐκλείδης ἐμιμήσατο ταῦτα,
γραμμαῖς ἐμφιλοσοφῶν ταῖς οὐκ οὔσαις, καὶ κάμνων ἐν ταῖς
ἀποδείξεσι; τίνος Παλαμήδους τακτικὰ κινήματά τε καὶ
σχήματα γεράνων, ὥς φασι, καὶ ταὐτὰ παιδεύματα κινουμένων

ἐν τάξει, καὶ μετὰ ποικίλης τῆς πτήσεως; ποῖοι
Φειδίαι καὶ Ζεύξιδες καὶ Πολύγνωτοι, Παρράσιοι τέ τινες
καὶ ἈγλαοΦῶντες, κάλλη μεθ’ ὑπερβολῆς γράφειν καὶ
πλάττειν εἰδότες; τίς Κνώσσιος Δαιδάλου χορὸς ἐναρμόνιος,
νύμφη πονηθεὶς εἰς κάλλους περιουσίαν, ἢ λαβύρινθος

Κρητικὸς δυσδιέξοδος καὶ δυσέλικτος, ποιητικῶς εἰπεῖν,
καὶ πολλάκις ἀπαντῶν ἑαυτῷ τοῖς τῆς τέχνης σοΦίσμασι;
καὶ σιωπῶ μυρμήκων ταμιεῖά τε καὶ ταμίας, καὶ

2 αι] οἱ b ’Or. I' || 4 ἐξυφαίνουσι abf || 5 ἀσθενῶν bdef || 6 τροΦης]
τρυφῆς ’in quibused.' || 7 om ἐν c


1. σίμβλοις] ’hives’; translate,
’when the hives in which it is done
are so dark and the structure itself is
invisible.'


4. ἱστούς] ’webs’; ἀρχῶν, ’ends’
as in Acts χ II.


5. τῶν ἀσθενεστέρων] Cp. i 9.


7. Υρ. ταῖς οὐκ οὔσαις] ’ivith his
imaginary limes.’


8. τίνος Παλ. κτλ.] Παλ. depends
upon τακτικά; τακτικά is nom.
to ἐμιμήσατο understood, and κιν. κ.
σχ. acc after it. The same verb
must be supplied for ποῖοι Φειδίαι etc.
Ὥς φασι implies (as in ἑ 24) that Gr.
himself had not had opportunities of
observing the crane and the peacock.
The usual reading ταῦτα παιδ’. can
only make sense, if at all, if κ. ταῦτα
be taken as in § 19, ’and that, when
they move': ταὐτά makes good sense,
and the καὶ before it points on to
καὶ μετὰ ποικ. ‘What Pal. drew up
tactics to rival the movements and
groupings of the cranes, which, so
they tell us, without breaking rank
go through the same drill- like movements,
in ever so many figures of
flight?’


12. γράφειν κ. πλάττειν] Phidias
πλάττειν, the rest γράφειν ᾔδεσαν.


13. Κνώσσιος] at Cnossus, or
Gnossus, in Crete; νύμφῃ, Ariadne,
see Homer II. xviii 592 foil.


15. δυσέλικτος] ‘hard to unwind.'
Gr. apologizes for using so poetical
a word.


16. ἀπαντῶν] ‘meeting.'




θησαυρισμὸν τροφῆς τῷ καιρῷ σύμμετρον, τἄλλα τε ὅσα
περὶ ὁδῶν καὶ περὶ ἡγουμένων καὶ τῆς ἐν τοῖς ἔργοις
εὐταξίας ἔγνωμεν ἱστορούμενα.

 

Εἰ τούτων ἐφικτὸς ὁ λόγος σοι, καὶ τὴν περὶ
ταῦτα σύνεσιν ἔγνως, σκέψαι καὶ φυτῶν διαφοράς, μέχρι

καὶ τῆς ἐν φύλλοις φιλοτεχνίας πρὸς τὸ ἥδιστόν τε ἅμα
ταῖς ὄψεσι καὶ τοῖς καρποῖς χρησιμώτατον. σκέψαι μοι
καὶ καρπῶν ποικιλίαν καὶ ἀφθονίαν, καὶ μάλιστα τῶν
ἀναγκαιοτάτων τὸ κάλλιστον. καὶ σκέψαι μοι καὶ δυνάμεις
ῥιζῶν καὶ χυμῶν καὶ ἀνθέων καὶ ὀδμῶν, οὐχ ἡδίστων

μόνον, ἀλλὰ καὶ πρὸς ὑγίειαν ἐπιτηδείων, καὶ χρωμάτων
χάριτας καὶ ποιότητας. ἔτι δὲ λίθων πολυτελείας καὶ
διαυγείας· ἐπειδή σοι πάντα προὔθηκεν, ὥσπερ ἐν πανδαισίᾳ
κοινῇ, ὅσα τε ἀναγκαῖα, καὶ ὅσα πρὸς ἀπόλαυσιν,
ἡ φύσις· ἵν’, εἰ μή τι ἄλλο, ἐξ ὧν εὐεργετῇ, γνωρίσῃς θεόν,

καὶ τῷ δεῖσθαι γένῃ σεαυτοῦ συνετώτερος. ἐντεῦθεν
ἔπελθέ μοι γῆς πλάτη καὶ μήκη, τῆς κοινῆς πάντων
μητρός, καὶ κόλπους θαλαττίους ἀλλήλοις τε καὶ τῇ γῇ

2 περι ηγουμ.] om περι cd ‘tres Colb. Or. 1’ 26. 8 και καρπων] om
και c || ποικιλίαν] + τε e || 9 και σκεψαι] om και cdef || 10 χυμων] χυλων
def


1. τῷ καιρῷ σύμμετρον] ‘proportioned
to the time’ for which the
food is required.


26. Plants, stones, earth, and its
springs—its medicinal waters—are
full of wonders ; the stability of the
earth, its adaptation of mountain
and plain to the convenience of its
inhabitants.


6. τῆς ἐν φύλλοις φιλ.] ‘the artistic
skill displayed in the leaves.’
They are ‘profitable to the fruits’
by shading them, as Elias says. Cp.
Bas. Hex. v κατέσχισται τὸ τῆς
ἀμπέλου φύλλον, ἵνα καὶ πρὸς τὰς ἐκ
τοῦ ἀέρος βλάβας ὁ βότρυς ἀντέχῃ καὶ
τὴν ἀκτῖνα τοῦ ἡλίου διὰ τῆς ἀραιότψτος
δαψιλῶς ὑποδέχηται.


9. δυνάμεις ῥίζῶν] Wisd. vii 20, —
a passage which Gr. has had in view
for some time.


12. ποιότητας] rather a curious
word to join with χάριτας. The
point pern, lies in the plur.; ‘the
charms of the colours and their
varieties of quality.’


13. πανδαισίᾳ] ‘α perfect feast,’
from δαίς.


15. εὐεργετῇ] 2nd per. sing. pres.
ind. pass.


18. ἀλλ. κ. τῇ γῇ συνδ.] It is
hard to see what Gr. means by this
expression. The bays may be said
to be connected with the land by
the way they run up into it and
affect its whole character. Gr. is no
doubt thinking of the deeply indented
coast of the Aegean. They are con-
nected
with each other, apparently,
because the coasting vessels pass
along from bay to bay, rounding the
headlands, and plying between the
towns that lie in the gulfs. Cp. ἑ 27.




συνδεομένους, καὶ ἀλσῶν κάλλη, καὶ ποταμούς, καὶ πηγὰς
δαψιλεῖς τε καὶ ἀενάους, οὐ μόνον ψυχρῶν καὶ ποτίμων
ὑδάτων, καὶ τῶν ὑπὲρ γῆς, ἀλλὰ καὶ ὅσαι ὑπὸ γῆν ῥέουσαι,
καὶ σήραγγάς τινας ὑποτρέχουσαι, εἶτ’ ἐξωθούμεναι βιαίῳ

τῷ πνεύματι καὶ ἀντιτυπούμεναι, εἶτ’ ἐκπυρούμεναι τῷ
σφοδρῷ τῆς πάλης καὶ τῆς ἀντιθέσεως, ὅπη παρείκοι κατὰ
μικρὸν ἀναρρήγνυνται, καὶ τὴν τῶν θερμῶν λουτρῶν χρείαν
ἐντεῦθεν ἡμῖν χαρίζονται πολλαχοῦ τῆς γῆς, καὶ μετὰ τῆς
ἐναντίας δυνάμεως ἰατρείαν ἄμισθον καὶ αὐτόματον. εἰπὲ

πῶς καὶ πόθεν ταῦτα — τί τὸ μέγα τοῦτο καὶ ἄτεχνον
ὕφασμα — οὐχ ἧττον ἐπαινετὰ τῆς πρὸς ἄλληλα σχέσεως,
ἢ καθ’ ἕκαστον Θεωρούμενα; πῶς γῆ μὲν ἕστηκε παγία
καὶ ἀκλινής; ἐπὶ τίνος ὀχουμένη, καὶ τίνος ὄντος τοῦ
ὑπερείδοντος; καὶ τίνος ἐκεῖνο πάλιν; οὐδὲ γὰρ ὁ λόγος

ἔχει, ἐφ’ ὃ ἐρεισθῇ, πλὴν τοῦ θείου θελήματος. καὶ πῶς

1 συνδεδεμένους de || 2 μόνων a || 5 om καὶ ἀντιτυπούμεναι e || 7 αναρργνυται
b: νυηται e || I 5 O] ᾦ d


3. ὑπὸ γῆν] a special feature of
Asia Minor. Σήραγγες are ’holes?
’passages, Gr.'s theory of hot
springs is that the water is heated
by the violence with which it is
forced out of its underground pas-
sages, by blasts of air which it en-
counters. These dash it from side
to side and drive it with intense
pressure through narrow apertures,
until it assumes a very high temperature
ἐκπυρούμεναι). Ὅπη παρείκοι,
‘wherever possuble.' I do not
know whence Gr. obtained this
theory. It is not in Arist. Meteor.
or de Mnndo, although Arist. has
much to say about underground
currents of wind, as well as of underground
streams. Arist. rightly connects
hot springs with volcanic action.
But cp. Bas. Hex. iv ἐκ τῆς αὐτῆς
τοῦ κινοῦντος αἰτίας ζέουσα γίνεται...
καὶ πυρώδης.


8. μ. τ. ἐναντίας δ.] generally
understood to mean ’along with the
’ This is of course an impossible
interp. of the words. The
μετὰ is, as frequently in Gr., used in
that general sense which includes
the instrumental, — like its modern
representative μέ; cp. ἑ 13 σκοπεῖ
μετὰ τῆς ἰδ’. ἀσθενείας, § 2 I προσβ.
μετὰ τῶν αἰσθήσεων, ἑ 28 μεθ’ οὗ
λόγος. So here it will mean ‘with
their contrary (i. e. corrective) force.'


10. ἄτεχνον ὕφ’.] a kind of oxymoron.
Gr. uses ὑφαίνειν in a wide
way, without any notion of ‘weaving';
e.g. § 24 συνυφαίνων τὴν ᾠδήν.


11. ἐπαινετά] agrees with ταῦτα,
the question τί τὸ μέγα κτλ. being
parenthetical. τῆς σχές. depends on
ἐπαιν., ’ to be praised for, in reference
to, their correlation to each other. ’


14. οὐδέ γὰρ ὁ λόγος κτλ.] ‘reason
knows of nothing for it (the earth)
to rest upon.'




ἡ μὲν εἰς ὀρῶν κορυφὰς ἀνηγμένη, ἡ δὲ εἰς πεδία καθεζομένη,
καὶ τοῦτο πολυειδῶς καὶ ποικίλως, καὶ ταῖς κατ’ ὀλίγον
ἐναλλαγαῖς μεθισταμένη, πρός τε τὴν χρείαν ἐστὶν ἀΦθονωτώρα,
καὶ τῷ ποικίλῳ χαριεστέρα; καὶ ἡ μὲν εἰς οἰκήσεις
νενεμημένη, ἡ δὲ ἀοίκητος, ὅσην αἱ ὑπερβολαὶ τῶν ὀρῶν

ἀποτέμνονται, καὶ ἄλλη πρὸς ἄλλο τι πέρας σχιζομένη καὶ
ἀποβαίνουσα, τῆς τοῦ θεοῦ μεγαλουργίας ἐναργέστατόν
ἐστι γνώρισμα;

 

Θαλάττης δέ, εἰ μὲν μὴ τὸ μέγεθος εἶχον θαυμάζειν,
ἐθαύμασα ἂν τὸ ἥμερον, καὶ πῶς ἵσταται λελυμένη τῶν

ἰδίων ὅρων ἐντός· εἰ δὲ μὴ τὸ ἥμερον, πάντως τὸ μέγεθος.
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἀμφότερα, τὴν ἐν ἀμφοτέροις δύναμιν ἐπαινέσομαι.
τί τὸ συναγαγόν; τί τὸ δῆσαν; πῶς ἐπαίρεταί τε καὶ
ἵσταται, ὥσπερ αἰδουμένη τὴν γείτονα γῆν; πῶς καὶ
δέχεται ποταμοὺς ἅπαντας, καὶ ἡ αὐτὴ διαμένει διὰ πλήθους

περιουσίαν, ἢ οὐκ οἶδ’ ὅτι χρὴ λέγειν; πῶς ψάμμος ὅριον
αὐτῇ, τηλικούτῳ στοιχείῳ; ἔχουσί τι λέγειν οἱ φυσικοὶ
καὶ σοφοὶ τὰ μάταια, καὶ κυάθῳ μετροῦντες ὄντως τὴν
θάλασσαν, τὰ τηλικαῦτα ταῖς ἑαυτῶν ἐπινοίαις; ἢ συντόμως
ἐγὼ παρὰ τῆς γραφῆς τοῦτο φιλοσοφήσω καὶ τῶν μακρῶν

λόγων πιθανώτερόν τε καὶ ἀληθέστερον; Πρόσταγμα

27. 15 απαντας] πάντας bdef || om η e


2. τ. κατ’ ὁ. ἐναλλ. μεθ’.] Mountain
passes into plain by degrees.


4. εἰς οἰκ. νενεμ] ‘occupied for
habitations?


5. ὅσην] rel. to antec. ἡ δὲ ἀοἰκ.,
‘where where the too great height of the
mountains cuts it off; the mountains
are regarded as appropriating the
space (mid.).


6. καἰ ἄλλη κτλ.] ‘and one part
ἲς severed from another and comes
to a different bound? such as the
Atlantic or the Indian Ocean. Cp.
Acts xxvi 27.


27.The sea, the rivers.


10. ἵσταται λελ.] ‘it ties at ease?
opp. to being gathered up in stormy
waves. It almost looks as if by
μέγεθος Gr. meant the sea in storm
(?‘height’).


15. ποταμοὺς ἄπ’] ’Eccl. i 7
but Gr. prob. draws the thought
from Aristotle.


16. περιουσίαν] Cp. ἑ 25. If
that be not the reason, Gr. knows
no other ἢ οὐκ οἶδ.). Cp. § 30.


ib. ὄριον] Jer. v 22.


19. τὰτηλ.] in app. to τὴν θάλ., ταῖς
ἑ. ἐπ’. to κυάθω. The proverb has
been embodied in a pretty legend
about St Austin.


20. παρὰ τῆς γρ.] ’’from Scripture,’
’by borrowing the words of Scr.’
Job xxvi 10. Γυρῷ, ‘to round.’





ἐγύρωσεν ἐπὶ πρόσωπον ὕδατος. τοῦτο τῆς ὑγρᾶς φύσεως
ὁ δεσμός. πῶς δὲ τὸν χερσαῖον ναυτίλον ἄγει ξύλῳ μικρῷ
καὶ πνεύματι, — τοῦτο οὐ θαυμάζεις ὁρῶν; οὐδ’ ἐξίσταταί
σου ἡ διάνοια; — iva γῆ καὶ θάλασσα δεθῶσι ταῖς χρείαις

καὶ ταῖς ἐπιμιξίαις, καὶ εἰς ἓν ἔλθῃ τῷ ἀνθρώπῳ τὰ
τοσοῦτον ἀλλήλων διεστηκότα κατὰ τὴν φύσιν; τίνες δὲ
πηγῶν αἱ πρῶται πηγαί, ζήτησον, ἄνθρωπε, εἴ τί σοι
τούτων ἐξιχνεῦσαι ἢ εὑρεῖν δυνατόν. καὶ τίς ὁ ποταμοῖς
σχίσας καὶ πεδία καὶ ὄρη, καὶ δοὺς τὸν δρόμον ἀκώλυτον;

καὶ πῶς ἐκ τῶν ἐναντίων τὸ θαῦμα, μήτε θαλάσσης ἐπεξ-
ιούσης, μήτε ποταμῶν ἱσταμένων; τίς δὲ ἡ τῶν ὑδάτων
τροφή, καὶ τί τὸ ταύτης διάφορον, τῶν μὲν ἄνωθεν ἀρδομένων,
τῶν δὲ ταῖς ῥίζαις ποτιζομένων, ἵνα τι καὶ αὐτὸς
κατατρυφήσω τοῦ λόγου, θεοῦ τὴν τρυφὴν ἐξηγούμενος;

 

Ἄγε δὴ γῆν ἀφεὶς καὶ τὰ περὶ γῆν, πρὸς τὸν
ἀέρα κουφίσθητι τοῖς τῆς διανοίας πτεροῖς, ἵνα σοι καθ’
ὁδὸν ὁ λόγος προίη· κἀκεῖθεν ἀνάξω σε πρὸς τὰ οὐράνια,
καὶ τὸν οὐρανὸν αὐτόν, καὶ τὰ ὑπὲρ οὐρανόν. καὶ τοῖς
ἑξῆς ὀκνεῖ μὲν προσβῆναι ὁ λόγος, προσβήσεται δὲ ὅμως

ὁπόσον ἔξεστι. τίς ὁ χέας ἀέρα, τὸν πολὺν τοῦτον πλοῦτον

8 ποταμοῖς] μους abcef || 14 om τὴν cdf 28. 17 προίη] προῄει e

πλοῦτον τοῦτον e


1. τοῦτο] sc. τὸ πρόσταγμα.


2. τὸν χέρσ’. ναυτ.] There is
prob. no direct ref. to the shell-fish
called a nautilus, which only bears
that name because of its similarity
to a man in a sailing boat. By ’the
land ’’ Gr. means the land
animal which nevertheless finds a
home on the sea. At the same time
the word ναυτίλος had become so
exclusively poetical as applied to
men and ships, and so recognised a
name for the shell-fish, that the ad-
dition of χ. was necessary to prevent
a moment's mistake. Ἄγει sc. ἢ
θάλασσα.


4. deduct] Cp. ἑ 26. Χρείαις
κ. ἐπ’. almost ’demand and supply.’


8. ποταμοῖς] ἴθι the rivers, ’ not
‘with,’ in spite of Hab. iii 9.


10. ἐπεξιούσης] ‘break out.’


11. ἢ τῶν ὑδ. ‘how are the
waters fed?’ The metaphor
more ’luxuriant’ in Greek than in
English, and Gr. proceeds, with an
apology, to develope it. Some of
them, he says, are ’watered from
above,’ i.e. are fed by
others (and this is the climax of the
’luxuriance’) ’drink with their roots?
i.e. are fed by springs from under-
ground. These last Gr. had learned
from Arist. to be connected with
the sea.


28. The air, and all the pheno-
mena of meteorology.


16. καθ’ ὁδόν] ’in due order,’
’methodically’; Plat. Rep. 435 Α.




καὶ ἄφθονον, οὐκ ἀξίαις, οὐ τύχαις μετρούμενον, οὐχ ὅροις
κρατούμενον, οὐχ ἡλικίαις μεριζόμενον, ἀλλὰ κατὰ τὴν τοῦ
μάννα διανομὴν αὐταρκείᾳ περιλαμβανόμενον καὶ ἰσομοιρίᾳ
τιμώμενον· τὸ τῆς πτηνῆς φύσεως ὄχημα, τὴν
ἀνέμων ἕδραν, τὴν ὡρῶν εὐκαιρίαν, τὴν ζώων ψύχωσιν,

μᾶλλον δὲ τῆς ψυχῆς πρὸς τὸ σῶμα συντήρησιν, ἐν ᾧ
σώματα, καὶ μεθ’ οὐ λόγος, ἐν ᾧ φῶς καὶ τὸ φωτιζόμενον,
καὶ ἡ ὄψις ἡ δι’ αὐτοῦ ῥέουσα; σκόπει δέ μοι καὶ τὰ ἑξῆς·
οὐ γὰρ συγχωροῦμαι τῷ ἀέρι δοῦναι τὴν ἅπασαν δυνα-
στείαν τῶν τοῦ ἀέρος εἶναι νομιζομένων. τίνα μὲν ἀνέμων

ταμιεῖα; τίνες δὲ θησαυροὶ χιόνος; τίς δὲ ὁ τετοκὼς βώλους
δρόσου, κατὰ τὸ γεγραμμένον; ἐκ γαστρὸς δὲ τίνος ἐκπορεύεται
κρύσταλλος; τίς ὁ δεσμεύων ὕδωρ ἐν νεφέλαις, καὶ
τὸ μὲν ἱστὰς ἐπὶ τῶν νεφελῶν—ὣ τοῦ θαύματος—λόγῳ
κρατουμένην φύσιν τὴν ῥέουσαν, τὸ δὲ ἐκχέων ἐπὶ πρόσωπον
πάσης τῆς γῆς, καὶ σπείρων καιρίως καὶ ὁμοτίμως,
καὶ οὔτε ἀφιεὶς ἅπασαν τὴν ὑγρὰν οὐσίαν ἐλευθέραν καὶ
ἄσχετον, — ἀρκεῖ γὰρ ἡ ἐπὶ Νῶε κάθαρσις, καὶ τῆς ἑαυτοῦ
διαθήκης οὐκ ἐπιλήσμων ὁ ἀψευδέστατος, — οὔτε ἀνέχων

11 τινες δε] om ’δε ef || 13 τις] + ’δε e || 15 κρτουμενην]+ τὴν ’Reg. Cypr.’
|| 17 ουτε] οὐδὲ abef ΙΙ απασαν] ἅπασι ’Reg. Cypr.’


1. οὐκ ἀξίαις] ’by deserts’; Matt.
v 45; or perh. ’ by differences of
rank.’ Τύχαις, ‘by fortunes.’ ῾Ηλ., 
coming after ὄροις, may mean ’ages’
in the sense of a measurement of
time, ’to certain generations.’


2. τοῦ μάννα] Ex. xvi 18.

αὐταρκεῖ π.] ’freely taken
in’; no leave has to be asked, and
ἰσομ. τιμώμ. ’each ’s share is of
equal ’’, lit. ’assessed at an
equality οἱ partition.’


5. εὐκαιρίαν] The air is said to
the ’suitableness of seasons’ be-
cause the suitableness of seasons de-
pends upon atmospheric conditions.


7. μεθ’ οὐ λόγος] ’with which
(cp. § 26) we speak.’


9. οὐ γὰρ συγχωρ.] ace. to Elias,
directed against Arist. (presumably
de Mund. 4).


11. θησαυροὶ χιόνος] Job xxxviii
22.


ib. τίς ὁ τετοκώς κτλ.] Job xxxviii
28, 29.


13. δεσμεύων υδ.] Job xxvi 8.


14. τὸ μὲν ἱστάς] τὸ μὲν and τὸ δέ
appear to be ’part’ and ’part’ of
the water thus ’bound ’ In that
case φύσιν is in app. to τὸ μέν.


15. ἐπὶ πρόσωπονπ. τ. γ] Scripbe
tural language, but not a definite
quotation.


16. ὁμοτίμως] Elias rightly refers
to Matt, v 45.


19. διαθήκης] Gen. ix 12.




παντάπασιν, ἵνα μὴ πάλιν Ἡλίου τινὸς δεηθῶμεν, τὴν
ξηρότητα λύοντος; Ἐὰν κλείσῃ, φησί, τὸν οὐρανόν, τίς
ἀνοίξει; ἐὰν δὲ ἀνοίξῃ τοὺς καταράκτας, τίς συνέξει; τίς
οἴσει τὴν ἐπ’ ἀμφότερα τοῦ ὑετίζοντος ἀμετρίαν, ἐὰν μὴ

τοῖς ἑαυτοῦ μέτροις καὶ σταθμοῖς διεξαγάγῃ τὰ σύμπαντα;
τί μοι φιλοσοφήσεις περὶ ἀστραπῶν καὶ βροντῶν, ὦ
βροντῶν ἀπὸ γῆς σὺ καὶ οὐδὲ μικροῖς σπινθῆρσι τῆς
ἀληθείας λαμπόμενε; τίνας ἀτμοὺς ἀπὸ γῆς αἰτιάσῃ νέφους
δημιουργούς, ἢ ἀέρος πύκνωσίν τινα, ἢ νεφῶν τῶν μανοτάτων

θλῖψιν ἢ σύρρηξιν, ἵνα ἢ μὲν θλίψις σοι τὴν
ἀστραπήν, ἡ δὲ ῥῆξις τὴν βροντὴν ἀπεργάσηται; ποῖον
δὲ πνεῦμα στενοχωρούμενον, εἶτα οὐκ ἔχον διέξοδον, ἵνα
ἀστράψῃ θλιβόμενον, καὶ βροντήσῃ ῥηγνύμενον; εἰ τὸν
ἀέρα διῆλθες τῷ λογισμῷ, καὶ ὅσα περὶ ἀέρα, ψαῦσον ἤδη

σὺν ἐμοὶ καὶ οὐρανοῦ καὶ τῶν οὐρανίων. πίστις δὲ ἀγέτω
πλέον ἡμᾶς ἢ λόγος, εἴπερ ἔμαθες τὸ ἀσθενὲς ἐν τοῖς
ἐγγυτέρω, καὶ λόγον ἔγνως τὸ γνῶναι τὰ ὑπὲρ λόγον, ἵνα
μὴ παντελῶς ἐπίγειος ἦς ἢ περίγειος, ἀγνοῶν καὶ αὐτὸ
τοῦτο, τὴν ἄγνοιαν.

 

τίς περιήγαγεν οὐρανόν, ἔταξεν ἀστέρας; μᾶλλον
δὲ τί πρὸ τούτων οὐρανὸς καὶ ἀστέρες ἔχοις ἂν εἰπεῖν

5 διεξάγῃ ce ’Reg. a Or. ’ ΙΙ 8 λαμπόμενος def || ἄπο] ἔπι ’Or. 1’ ||
9 μανωτατων cdf || 17 τὸ] τὼ ef


1. Ἡλίου τ.] 1 Kings xviii 45.


2. κλείση] Job xii 14. Gr. adds
τὸν οὐρ.


3. ἀνοίξῃ τοὺς κ.] Gen. vii ΙΙ;
cp. Mai. iii 10. Συνέσιε, Gen. viii 2.


4. οἴσει] ‘shall bear’; τὴν τὴν ἐπ’ ἁ.
ἀμετρίαν means of course excess in
giving too much or too little.


5. μέτροις κ. στάθμ’.] Job xxviii
25.


8. τίνας ἀτμούς] directed against
Arist. Meteor, i 4.


9. μανοτάτων] μανός (the quan-
tity of the α is variable) = ’rare,’ as
opp. to ’dense.’ The interjection
of τῶν μ. is, of course, Gr.'s form
counter argument. The clouds are
too ’rare’ to produce such effects.


17. λόγον ἔγμως κτλ.] ’know
that it is reason to know the things
above reason? Something like St
Austin’s Credo ut intellegam.


18. ἔπη. ἢ περίγ.] ’on the earth or
concerned with the earth, ignorant
even of your ignorance? Cp. Plat.
Leg. ix 863 c.


29. The heavens, the sun.


20. περιήγαγεν] ’ made it revolve’;
cp. § 30.




ὁ μετέωρος, ὁ τὰ ἐν ποσὶν ἀγνοῶν, καὶ οὐδὲ σεαυτὸν
μετρῆσαι δυνάμενος, τὰ δὲ ὑπὲρ τὴν σὴν φύσιν πολυπραγμονῶν,
καὶ κεχηνὼς εἰς τὰ ἄμετρα; ἔστω γάρ σε κύκλους
καὶ περιόδους καὶ παησιασμοὺς καἰ ἀποχωρήσεις καταλαμβάνειν,
λαμβάνειν, ἐπιτολὰς καὶ ἀνατολάς, καὶ μοίρας τινὰς καἰ

λεπτότητας, καὶ ὅσοις σὺ τὴν θαυμασίαν σου ταύτην
ἐπιστήμην ἀποσεμνύνεις· οὔπω τοῦτο κατάληψις τῶν
ὄντων ἐστίν, ἀλλὰ κινήσεως τινος ἐπιτήρησις, ἣ πλείονι
γυμνασία βεβαιωθεῖσα, καὶ εἰς ἓν ἀγαγοῦσα τὰ τηρηθέντα
πλείοσιν, εἶτα λόγον ἐπινοήσασα, ἐπιστήμη προσηγορεύθη·

ὥσπερ τὰ περὶ σελήνην παθήματα γνώριμα γέγονε τοῖς
πολλοῖς, τὴν ὄψιν ἀρχὴν λαβόντα τῆς γνώσεως. σὺ δέ,
εἰ λίαν ἐπιστήμων εἶ τούτων, καὶ δικαίως ζητεῖς θαυμάζεσθαι,
εἰπὲ τίς ἡ τῆς τἀξ ἕως αἰτία καὶ τῆς κινήσεως; πόθεν
ἥλιος φρυκτωρεῖ πάσῃ τῆ οἰκουμένῃ καὶ πάσαις ὄψεσιν,

ὥσπερ χοροῦ τινὸς κορυφαῖος, πλέον τοὺς ἄλλους ἀστέρας
ἀποκρύπτων φαιδρότητι ἤ τινες ἐκείνων ἑτέρους; ἀπόδειξις
δέ, οἱ μὲν ἀντιλάμπουσιν, ὁ δὲ ὑπερλάμπει, καὶ οὐδὲ ὅτι
συνανίσχουσιν ἐᾷ γνωρίζεσθαι, καλὸς ὡς νυμφίος, ταχὺς
ὡς γίγας καὶ μέγας· οὐδὲ γὰρ ἀνέχομαι ἄλλοθεν ἢ τοῖς


29. 16 κορυφαίου e


3. κύκλους κτλ.] ’revolutions,
and orbits, and conjunctions (lit.
and separations (departures),
and risings (there seems
to be no difference between ἔπιτ’.
and ἀνατ), νιν degrees (in the astronomical
sense) as they call them
τινάς), and ’ Perh. the
last word has ref. to the speculations
about the ’aether.’ But as λεπτὸν
appears to be used in the astronomical
sense of a ’minute,’ it is possible
that Gr. may intend λ. here in
that sense.


8. ἐπιτήρησις] There could hardly
be abetter description of inductive
science.


11. ὤσπερ τὰπεμ σ. ΙΙ.] ἃς, for
instance, what happens to the moon
has become α piece ὁ general knowapproaches),
ledge, a knowledge arising in the first
instance from ocular observatioin.’
Παθήμ., cp. § 30 πάθη.


15. Φρυκτωρεῖ] ‘gives the fiery
signal.’


18. οἱ μὲν ἀντιλάμπ.] ‘they shine
against him, but he outshines them,
and does not suffer even their ising
with him to be perceived’; when
light might be thought not to have
gained its full strength.


19. ὡς νυμφίος . . . γίγας] Ps. xviii
6 (xix 5).


20. ἄλλοθεν ἢ τοῖς ἐμοῖς] i.e. from
pagan sources; cp. ἀλλότριος §§ 16


30. Ἀποσεμν. ‘ to glorify.




ἐμοῖς τοῦτον ἀποσεμνύνειν· τοσοῦτος τὴν δύναμιν, ὥστε
ἀπ’ ἄλλων ἄκρων ἄλλα τῆ θερμότητι καταλαμβάνειν, καὶ
μηδὲν διαφεύγειν αὐτοῦ τὴν αἴσθησιν, ἀλλὰ πᾶσαν πλη-
ροῦσθαι καὶ ὄψιν φωτὸς καὶ σωματικὴν φύσιν θερμότητος·

θέροντος, ἀλλ’ οὐ φλέγοντος, εὐκρασίας ἡμερότητι καὶ
τάξει κινήσεως, ὡς πᾶσι παρόντος, καὶ πάντα ἐπίσης
περιλαμβάνοντος.

 

Ἐκεῖνο δέ σοι πηλίκον, εἰ κατενόησας’ τοῦτο ἐν
αἰσθητοῖς ἥλιος, ὅπερ ἐν νοητοῖς θεός, ἔφη τις τῶν ἀλλο-

τρίων. αὐτὸς γὰρ ὄψιν φωτίζων, ὥσπερ ἐκεῖνος
αὐτὸς καὶ τῶν ὁρωμένων ἐστὶ τὸ κάλλιστον, ὥσπερ ἐκεῖνος
τῶν νοουμένων. ἀλλὰ τί τὸ κινῆσαν αὐτὸν ἀπ’ ἀρχῆς; τί
δὲ τὸ ἀεὶ κινοῦν καὶ περιάγον ἑστῶτα λόγῳ καὶ μὴ
κινούμενον, ὄντως ἀκάμαντα, καὶ φερέσβιον, καὶ φυσίζῳον,

καὶ ὅσα ποιηταῖς ὕμνηται κατὰ λόγον, καὶ μήτε τῆς ἑαυτοῦ
φορᾶς ποτὲ μήτε τῶν εὐεργεσιῶν ἱστάμενον; πῶς ἡμέρας
δημιουργὸς ὑπὲρ γῆς καὶ νυκτὸς ὑπὸ γῆν; ἢ οὐκ οἶδ’ ὅ τι
χρὴ λέγειν ἡλίῳ προσβλέψαντα. τίς ἡ τούτων πρόσλη-
ψίς τε καὶ ἀνθυφαίρεσις, καὶ ἡ τῆς ἀνισότητος ἰσότης, ἵν

εἴπω τι καὶ παράδοξον; πῶς δὲ ὡρῶν ποιητής τε καὶ

5 θεροντος] θερμαίνοντος e: θάλποντος ’El.’ ΙΙ 7 περιλαμβάνοντος] περιλαμποντος
’tres ’ 30. II om καὶ f || 13 ’δε] δάι df II 15 υμνεσαι e ||
μήτε] μήποτε ’in quibusd.’


2. ἀπ’ ἄλλων ἄκρων] ’from one
end he reaches another with his
heat.’ Ἄκρον is the LXX. word in
Ps. xviii 7 (xix 6). The following
words are not a quotation, but only
an allusion to those of the Ps.


5. θέροντος] ᾿warming.’

The sun; day and night, the
seasons; the moon and stars.


8.> ἐκεῖνο] the thought expressed
in the following words.


ib τοῦτο ἐν αἰσθ.] Plato Rep. vi
508 c.


13. ἑστῶτα λόγῳ] while fixed in
the law which governs him; λόγῳ
as e.g. in ἑ 16 πᾶσι λόγον ἐνθείς.


14. ἀκάμαντα] Hom. Il. xviii 239
‘untiring’; φερέσβιον, ‘bringing
means of life’; φυσίζῳον ‘life-begetting.’
It has not yet been ascertained
what poet applies the last
two epithets to the sun.


15. κατὰ λόγον] ’reasonably,’
’rightly? Φορᾶς, ’movement.’


17. ἢ οὐκ’] Cp. ξ 27.


18. πρόσλ. τε κ. ἀνθυφ.] ’the increase
and corresponding diminution’
of day and night. Ἀνισ. ἰσότης; at
the end of the year neither has
gained upon the other.




μεριστής, εὐτάκτως ἐπιγινομένων τε καὶ ἀπογινομένων,
καὶ ὥσπερ ἐν χορῷ συμπλεκομένων ἀλλήλαις καὶ διισταμένων,
τὸ μὲν φιλίας νόμῳ, τὸ δὲ εὐταξίας, καὶ κατὰ
μικρὸν κιρναμένων, καὶ ταῖς ἐγγύτησι κλεπτομένων ταὐτὸν
ἡμέραις τε καὶ νυξίν, ἵνα μὴ τῇ ἀηθείᾳ λυπήσωσιν; ἀλλ’

ἴτω μὲν ἡμῖν ἥλιος’ σὺ δὲ ἔγνως σελήνης φύσιν, καὶ πάθη,
καὶ μέτρα φωτός, καὶ δρόμους, καὶ πῶς ὁ μὲν ἡμέρας ἔχει
τὴν δυναστείαν, ἡ δὲ νυκτὸς προκαθέζεται, καὶ ἡ μὲν θηρίοις
δίδωσι παρρησίαν, ὁ δὲ ἄνθρωπον ἐπὶ τὸ ἔργον ἀνίστησιν,
ἢ ὑψούμενος ἢ ταπεινούμενος πρὸς τὸ χρησιμώτατον;

συνῆκας δὲ δεσμὸν Πλειάδος ἢ φραγμὸν ᾿Ωρίωνος, ὡς ὁ
ἀριθμῶν πλήθη ἄστρων καὶ πᾶσιν αὐτοῖς ὀνόματα καλῶν,
καὶ δόξης ἑκάστου διαφοράν, καὶ τάξιν κινήσεως, ἵνα σοι
πιστεύσω διὰ τούτων πλέκοντι τὰ ἡμέτερα καὶ κατὰ τοῦ
κτίστου τὴν κτίσιν ὁπλίζοντι;

 

Τί λέγεις; ἐνταῦθα στησόμεθα τοῦ λόγου μέχρι
τῆς ὕλης καὶ τῶν ὁρωμένων; ἢ ἐπειδὴ τοῦ κόσμου παντὸς
ἀντίτυπον τὴν Μωυσέως σκηνὴν οἶδεν ὁ λόγος, τοῦ ἐξ
ὁρατῶν τε καὶ ἀοράτων λέγω συστήματος, τὸ πρῶτον

5 ἀήθεια] ἀλήθεια de ’El.’ || 6 om ἥμιν bf Ἴ’ φύσιν] λύσιν ’Reg. Cypr.’
31. 17 om η be || 19 συστηματος] + η be


2. συμπλεκ. κ. διιστ.] The seasons
lock one another in embrace,
because there is no sharp line of demarcation
between them, and then
part. The poetical preacher sees in
the first action a law of love, in the
second, of order.


4. ταῖς ἐγγύτησι] ‘by their close
approach to each other (the pi. indicates
the nearness of each to the
next) filching from each other (mid.)
ἃς much and as little ἃς day and
night do, in order not to distress us
by anything startling (lit. by the
unaccustomedness, which would
mark a different kind of transition).’


6. πάθη] Cp. § 29 παθήματα.


7. ἠμἐρας..δυν] a ref. to Gen.
i 16, 18 (Ps. cxxxvi 7); but δὺν.
does not occur in the LXX. there,
8. θηρίοις κτλ.] a ref. to Ps. ciii
(civ) 20 — 23.


11. συνῆκας κτλ.] Job xxxviii 31.


ib. 6 ἀριθμῶν κτλ.] Ps. cxlvi
(cxlvii) 4.


13. δόξης...διαφ.] 1 Cor. xv 41.


14. διὰ τούτων πλ. τ. ἤμ’.] the
astrologer.


31. The spiritual beings who
people heaven.


16. μέχρι] Cp. § 9.


17. τ. κόσμου π.ἀντ] The παντὸς
is placed emphatically; the type
includes the unseen as well as the
seen. Ὁ λόγος, ‘our reason.’
does not refer to any passage of
Scripture; it was the traditional
interp. of his time. See however
Wisd. ix 8 (xviii 24) and cp. West-
cott Hebrews p. 237 foil.




καταπέτασμα διασχόντες, καὶ ὑπερβάντες τὴν αἴσθησιν,
εἰς τὰ ἅγια παρακύψωμεν, τὴν νοητὴν φύσιν καὶ ἐπουράνιον;
οὐκ ἔχομεν οὐδὲ ταύτην ἀσωμάτως ἰδεῖν, εἰ καὶ
ἀσώματος, πῦρ καὶ πνεῦμα προσαγορευομένην ἢ γινομένην.

ποιεῖν γὰρ λέγεται τοὺς ἀγγέλους αὐτοῦ πνεύματα, καὶ
τοὺς λειτουργοὺς αὐτοῦ πυρὸς φλόγα· εἰ μὴ ποιεῖν μέν
ἐστι τὸ συντηρεῖν τῷ λόγῳ, καθ’ ὃν ἐγένοντο. πνεῦμα δὲ
ἀκούει καὶ πῦρ· τὸ μὲν ὡς νοητὴ φύσις, τὸ δὲ ὡς καθάρσιος·
ἐπεὶ καὶ τῆς πρώτης οὐσίας τὰς αὐτὰς οἶδα κλήσεις.

πλὴν ἡμῖν γε ἀσώματος ἔστω, ἢ ὅτι ἐγγύτατα. ὁρᾷς
ὅπως ἰλιγγιῶμεν περὶ τὸν λόγον, καὶ οὐκ ἔχομεν οἷ προέλθωμεν,
ἢ τοσοῦτον ὅσον εἰδέναι ἀγγέλους τινὰς καὶ ἀρχαγγέλους,
θρόνους, κυριότητας, ἀρχάς, ἐξουσίας, λαμπρότητας,
ἀναβάσεις, νοερὰς δυνάμεις, ἢ νόας, καθαρὰς φύσεις καὶ

ἀκιβδήλους, ἀκινήτους πρὸς τὸ χεῖρον ἢ δυσκινήτους, περὶ
τὸ πρῶτον αἴτιον ἀεὶ χορευούσας· ἢ πῶς ἄν τις αὐτὰς
ἀνυμνήσειεν, ἐκεῖθεν ἐλλαμπομένας τὴν καθαρωτάτην

2 παρακυψομεν ?cd ΙΙ 8 τὸ ’δε] τὼ ’δε a || καθάρσιος] κάθαρσις ’in quibus.’
|| 9 επει] ἐπειδὴ ’Reg. a’ || om τὰς e ΙΙ 1 προσέλθωμεν f


1. διασχόντες] Cp. ἑ 3.


3. εἰ καὶ ἀσώματος] sc. εἴη. Gr.
will not pronounce upon the ques-
tion whether the heavenly φύσις,
i.e. the angels, are incorporeal or
not (cp. ἑ 8); but, even if they are,
we cannot conceive of them except
through corporeal images (cp. §§ 12,
13), such as are suggested by the
language of Scripture.


4. προσαγ. ἢ γιν.] ‘is called, or
is made.’


5. ποιεῖν γ. λέγεται] Ps. ciii
(civ) 4, Heb. i 7.


6. εἰ μὴ ποιεῖν] ’unless by "making’’
is meant keeping them to the
law of their original creation.’ To
’make’ the angels winds suggests a
change in their mode of existence;
but Gr. thinks that it may denote
what is contained in the original act
of creation, and not something sub-
sequent.


8. ἀκούει] audit, ’it is called.’


9. τῆς π. οὐσίας] sc. θεοῦ; cp. § 7.


11. ἰλιγγιῶμεν] Cp. § 21.


13. λαμπρότητας, ἀναβάσεις] It
seems as if these, like the foregoing,
were recognised titles for spiritual
beings; but they do not appear to
be used by any other of the Fathers.
Ἀνάβασις is a strange designation
for a personal being, and, if it
not for the ν. δὺν. which follows, it
might have been thought that Gr.
had turned from the angelic beings
to their actions, and that
referred (as perh. it does in any case)
to Jacob’s dream.


14. νόας] ace. pi. of νοῦς.




ἔλλαμψιν, ἢ ἄλλως ἄλλην κατὰ τὴν ἀναλογίαν τῆς φύσεως
καἰ τῆς τάξεως· τοσοῦτον τῷ καλῷ μορφουμένας καὶ
τυπουμένας, ὥστε ἄλλα γίνεσθαι φῶτα καὶ ἄλλους Φψτίζειν
δύνασθαι ταῖς τοῦ πρώτου φωτὸς ἐπιρροαῖς τε καὶ
διαδόσεσι· λειτουργοὺς θείου θελήματος, δυνατὰς ἰσχύι

φυσικῇ τε καὶ ἐπικτήτῳ, πάντα ἐπιπορευομένας, πᾶσι
πανταχοῦ παρούσας ἑτοίμως, προθυμίᾳ τε λειτουργίας καὶ
κουφότητι φύσεως· ἄλλας ἄλλο τι τῆς οἰκουμένης μέρος
διειληφυίας, ἢ ἄλλῳ τινὶ τοῦ παντὸς ἐπιτεταγμένας, ὡς
οἶδεν ὁ ταῦτα τάξας καὶ διορίσας· πάντα εἰς ἓν ἀγούσας,

πρὸς μίαν σύννευσιν τοῦ τὰ πάντα δημιουργήσαντος·
ὑμνῳδοὺς θείας μεγαλειότητος, θεωροὺς δόξης ἀιδίου καὶ
ἀιδίως, οὐχ ἵνα δοξασθῇ θεός, — οὐ γὰρ ἔστιν ὃ προστεθήσε-
ται τῷ πλήρει, τῷ καὶ τοῖς ἄλλοις χορηγῷ τῶν καλῶν, —
ἀλλ’ ἵνα μὴ λείπῃ τὸ εὐεργετεῖσθαι καὶ ταῖς πρώταις μετὰ

θεὸν φύσεσι; ταῦτα εἰ μὲν πρὸς ἀξίαν ὕμνηται, τῆς
τριάδος ἡ χάρις, καὶ τῆς μιᾶς ἐν τοῖς τρισὶ θεότητος· εἰ
δὲ τῆς ἐπιθυμίας ἐνδεέστερον, ἔχει τὸ νικᾷν καὶ οὕτως ὁ
λόγος. τοῦτο γὰρ ἠγωνίζετο παραστῆσαι, ὅτι νοῦ κρείττων

4 του πρώτου usque ad fin. desunt in a || 14 om τοῖς c


1. ἢ ἄλλως ἆ.] The ἢ offers an
alternative or correction to the sup.
τὴν καθ’. Cp. § 4.


3. ἄλλα γ. φῶτα] ‘become in their
turn lights,’ — ἄλλα in respect of
the πρῶτον φῶς.


5. δυνατὰς ἰσχύι] Ps. cii (ciii) 20.

πᾶσι πανταχοῦ] Gr. does not
of course mean at the same time;
ἑτοίμως shews it.


8. ἄλλας ἄλλο τι] Cp. Deut.
xxxii 8 (LXX.), Dan. x 13, 20, SI.
Διειλ. ‘having severally received.’


9. ἢ ἄλλῳ τινί] ’or (if not a portion
of the inhabited globe) set over
some other part of the universe,’ e.g.
a star.


10. εἰς ἐν] ‘bringing all into unity,
with reference to the approval, for
which alone they care μίαν),’ etc.


13. οὐχ ἵνα δ θ.] In scriptural
language the reverse might as truly
have been said.


14. τῷ πλήρει] Cp. § 11.


15. ἴνα μὴ Xeiirrj κτλ.] ‘but that
even these first beings after God may
never fail Δ’ be the recipients of
benefits? They might have seemed
too great to receive anything.
18. καὶ οὕτως] Even if he does
not speak as well as he wished,
has gained his point, viz. to shew
that even the angels are beyond our
understanding; much more (μὴ ὅτι,
cp. ἑ 11) God Himself.




καὶ ἡ τῶν δευτέρων φύσις, μὴ ὅτι τῆς πρώτης καὶ μόνης,
ὀκνῶ γὰρ εἰπεῖν, ὑπὲρ ἅπαντα.


2 ἀπάντα] ἅπαντας ‘Reg. Cypr.’


1. τῆς πρ. κ. μ.] Unless we are
to suppose that there is some irregularity
in the grammar, we must
supply φύσεως, so that the clause,
if written out in full, would run
μὴ εἰπεῖν ὅτι ἡ τῆς πρώτης κ. μ.
φύσεως φύσις.


1. ὀκνῶ γὰρ εἰπεῖν] Cp. § 13.
The formula implies that the statement
would be not incorrect, but
capable of misconception. To say
that the divine nature is ’above all’
might appear to coordinate it with
other things, as one, though the
highest, of a series: so Gr. prefers
to say μόνης, to bring out its absolute
uniqueness.

