  θεολογικοσ πρωτοσ. προσ ευνomιανουσ προδιάλεξις.  πρὸς τοὺς εν λόγω κομψοὺς ὁ λόγος. καὶ ἵνα ἀπὸ
της γραφης ἄρξωμαι· ἴδου εγω επὶ σε την ὑβρίστριαν.
εἰσὶ γάρ, εἰσί τινες, οἱ την ἀκοην προσκνωμενοι καὶ την
γλωσσαν, ηδη δε, ως ὁρω, καὶ την χεῖρα, τοῖς ημετεροις
λόγοις, καὶ χαίροντες ταῖς βεβηλοις κενοφωνίαις, καὶ 1. 2 ὑβρίστριαν] + καὶ παίδευσιν καὶ ἀκοην καὶ διάνοιαν bel || 4 om τοις
ημ...χαιροωτεσ acd 1. gr. complains of the verbosity
and contentiousness of his opponents,
unlike the brevity of st paul. he
wishes they would turn their attention
to practice. i. πρὸς τοὺς εν λόγω κομψοὺς ὁ
λόγος] the eunomians prided themselves
on their dialectical skill. πρὸς
is not ‘ ’ but ‘ addressed to ’ ;
‘ my argument is addressed to those
who are smart in ’ there
is a shade of sinister suggestion in
the word κομψός. ib. ἀπὸ της γρ.] it is not gr.'s
usual custom to take a text. 2. ἰδοὺ κτλ.] jer. 1 31 (lxx.
xxvii 31 ). the words added in b and
by elias appear to be interpretative
addition. but the omission of
words clearly required by the sense
a little below throws some doubt on
the authority of acd when they omit
these here. if genuine, the accusatives
express the departments in
which the eunomians display their
ὕβρις: ‘ ο thou most proud — in
training, and hearing, and dis-
positon’ the · ἀκοην anticipates
the following reference to st ’s
words. 3. τ. ἅκ. προσκνωμενοι] 2 tim.
iv 3. st ’s word is κνηθόμενοι.
gr. instinctively substitutes προσκν.
to prepare more easily for τοῖς ημ.
λόγοις, ‘ itching for our ’ of
course they ‘ itch ’ for them in a
different sense from those of whom
st ρ. speaks. 4. τ. χεῖρα] they are prepared
to fight. elias understands it of
itching to write against gr. 5.βεβ. κενοφ. κτλ.] ι tim. vi
20; 2 tim. ii 16 ; cf. 1 tim. vi 4 and
2 tim. ii 14.  ‘επεὶ δε πᾶσαν εὐσεβείας ὁδὸν καταλύσαντες πρὸς 6 γοῦν] οὑν d || 7 κυβισται] ’in nonnullis κυβενται.᾿ 2. 10 δησωσιν η
λύσωσι bd 1. περιττὸν κ. περίεργον] perhaps
’excessive in volume, and over-subtle
in character. ’ but the two words are
practically synonymous ; cf. i tim.
v 13 φλύαροι κ. περίεργοι. ib. τοῦ συντετμ. λόγου] rom. ix
28 ; cf. is. xxviii 22 (lxx.). 2. ὁ των ἅλ’. μαθητης κ. διδάσκαλοσ]
as distinguished from the professional
fessional training of the eunomian
disputants. it is a bold thing, in
the face of gal. i 12, to call st ρ.
‘ the ’s disciple ’ : probably
it is for that reason that gr. adds
‘ and ’ he appears to have
in view such incidents as gal. ii 14
perhaps also the pauline influence
discernible in st peter's epistles. 4. δεινην επιθ’. κτλ.] ’clever at
the employment of noble and choice
’ this way of using the com-
parative is familiar; it almost = nobilissimis
quibusque uerbis. 5. οὕτω τι καί] biting irony. even
a little attention to conduct would
make a great difference. ‘aσχολεῖσθαι
σθαι = ‘ to occupy oneself. ’ 6. καὶ ἴσως] the phrase means
(continuing the irony) that in that
case the chances would not be very
remote. 7. κυβισταὶ λόγων] ‘ word-tum-blers.'
κυβιστης (more usually κυβιστητηρ)
is one who stands on his
head, or turns head over heels, or
(according to elias) a diver. the
reading κυβευταὶ ’dicers,’ or ‘sharper's
(cf. eph. iv 14), would not suggest
the ‘ ridiculous ’ image which gr.
half apologizes for using. ib. ἄτοποι κ. παράδοξοι] ‘ strange
and ’ ἅτοπος does not
seem to be used here, as it often is,
either in the sense of ’absurd,’ i.e.
unreasonable, or in that of ‘monstrous,’
’ i.e. wicked. gr. only emphasizes
phasizes the surprising nature of the
feats which the eunomians perform. 2. no part of society is free
from their importunate wrangling;
christianity is in danger of becoming
a matter of pettifogging logic. the
opponents must give a fatherly heart
leave to express its concern. if they
are not moved by what he says, they
will at least have the satisfaction of
rejecting and deriding it. he does
not intend to adopt their style. 9. καταλύσαντες] ’having ’
stroyed ’ or ‘ broken up ’ ; both for
themselves and for their disciples.
εὐσεβεια is here practical piety. 10. ὅ τι δησ. η λῦσ’. τ. προβ.]
’they care for nothing but the opportunity
of tying or untying some
knotty proposition.‘ 2. καὶ των πάλ’.] ‘ and that too,
not stick wrestling matches ’ etc. 4. κλεπτει] ‘ takes unfair possession
of the ’ as opposed to the
legitimate skill in wrestling. ib. τοιαῦτα] ace. after ἀμαθων,
‘ not versed in things οf the ’
ib. συναρπ. τ. επαιν. ] an extension
of the metaphor of κλεπτει. ‘ extorts
applause? lit. ’ the applauder.’ 5. περιβομβεῖσθαι] όμβος, orig.
the humming of bees, comes to be
used of any insistent and continuous
noise. 6. ἀποκναίεσθαι] ’to be ’
or ‘made wade tedious. ’ demosthenes (564.
12) has the expression ἀποκναίει ἀηδιᾳ
καἰ ἀναισθησιᾳ καθ’ εκάστην εκκλησίαν
ταῦτα λεγων, which (jr. perhaps has
in mind. 8. παραμυθεῖσθαι συμφ. μ. τοῖς ζητημασι]
de billy and others understand
παραμ.= βαρύνεσθαι, comparing
job xvi. 2 παρακλητορας κακων,
which they take to mean ‘ abettors
of my afflictions.’ but this seems an
unnatural sense to put upon the verb,
and it would be hard to find a parallel
example. gr. prob. means that the
worse calamity of their disputations
relieves the lesser calamity of sorrow.
the ’comfort’ in ezek. xiv 22, 23 is
by some interpreted in this fashion. 10. ἁπλ. σύντροφον] ’associated
with simplicity,’ ‘ used to ’ it ; a frequent
use of the word. 11. ἀποσυλ. τ. π. λόγον ταχύτητι]
cf. james i 19. to rush into argument
is, in gr.’s view, a desecration
of the flower of womanly modesty.
it is best to take ἄνθος as the object
of ἀποσυλ., γυναῖκ’. being the subject. 12. τεχνύδριον] a diminutive of
τεχυη, like λογύδριον, χερύδριον, βιβλύδριον,
‘α little finicking profession.’ 13. τὸ μεγα η. μυστηριον] 1 tim.
iii 16. 14. κατάσκοποι] usually thought
to be used instead of επίσκοποι. but
there is no indication that gr. was
chiefly thinking of heretical bishops. 15. σπαρ. τὰ αὶσο.] jer. iv 19
(lxx.).  οὐ παντός, ω οὗτοι, τὸ περὶ θεοῦ φιλοσοφεῖν, οὐ
παντός· οὐχ οὕτω τὸ πρᾶγμα εὔωνον καὶ των χαμαὶ 1 ἄρα καὶ] om καὶ bcd || 10 νόμον ’τον ὑμετερον c. 3. 16 κα οις]
εφ’ ὄις b || εφ’ ὅσον] ων b 3. ελαλησαμεν . . . εσχςν] gr. as- 
sumes that what he asks has been
done, and looks back upon the re-
suit. the words are a quotation
from ecclus. xxv 9. 5. ὁ σπείρων τ. λ.] mk iv 14. 6. καἰ τοῦτο ημ’. διαπτύσαντες]
cp. oral, xxv § 18 διάπτυε μοι τὰς
ενστάσεις. ’ pouring contempt upon
this utterance as you have done tipon
others of ours.' ’ if they fail to get
good, gr. ironically says they will
at least have the advantage of in-
dulging in increased contempt for
their opponents. 9. παράδοξον] i.e. what the eu-
nomians will consider to be such.
ιι. νεανικως] ’ ’ ‘audaciously’; cp.
iii 1. on ’s lips of course it has
an ironical meaning. 3. to speak on theological subjects
belongs only to men prepared by deep
study and by moral self-purification.
it should be done only in seasons of
calmness, before serious hearers; and
the subjects should be such ἃς the or-
dinary intelligence can grasp. 14. εὔωνον] ’so cheaply acquired.'
ib. τ. χαμαὶ ερχομ’.] ’ nor is it the
property of those tvho go along upon
the ground ’ ; a common expression
from homer downwards. 17. διαβεβηκότων] διαβεβηκως is
one who stands firmly planted upon
both feet. elias paraphrases by
ηδραιωμενων, though he gives an
alternative explanation. 19. τὸ μετριωτατον] ‘to say the
least of ’ for the thouglht, cp.
athan. de inc. § 57. 14 εξικνεῖται bd ’or. 1 etc.’ 1. τυχόν] ‘ perhaps ἴθι even free
from danger. ’ the words are based
upon plato phaed. p. 67 μη καθαρω
γὰρ καθαροῦ εφάπτεσθαι μη οὐ θεμιτὸν
η. ib. σαθρᾷ] properly = σαπρᾷ ‘decayed,’
‘corrupt,’ but used in the
sense of ’ ’ ’feeble.’ cp. § 5
and iii 6, where it is contrasted with
ἰσχύν, ἰσχυροῖς. hesych. σαθρά· ἀσθενη,
κεκλασμενα. 3. ἰλύος] lit. ’mud’’, esp. in solution,
the impurities which hinder
a liquid from being clear. by της
εξ. ἰ. κ. ταραχης gr. seems to mean
the confusions and agitations of secular
life. ib. τὸ ηγεμονικόν] ‘ the commanding
’ a technical word from
philosophy, esp. stoic philosophy,
descriptive of the reason. see plutarch
de plac. phil. 898 ε and 903 b ;
also cic. de nat. deor. 11 xi 29. 4. τύποις] ’impressions,’ or ‘images.’
μοχθηρὸς is a word of many shades
of meaning. here it appears to
mean, not ’vicious,’ nor ’unhappy,’
but (like πονηροῖς just below) ’poor,’
’worthless,’ — ’worthless and roving
imaginations. ’ 5. κάλλη γραμμάτων] so pint,
speaks of κάλλη οἰκοδομημάτων = καλὰ
οἰκοδομηματα. 6. σχολάσαι κ. γν. θεόν] psalm
xlv (our xlvi) 10. the καὶ γνωναι
has the force of ‘ and so to ’
‘in order to know. ’ 7. ὅταν λάβ’. καιρόν] psalm ixxiv
3 (lxxv 2). not at all times, but
only when we ’ receive the οpportunity,’
can we ’judge according unto
right ’ in matters of theology. 8. διὰ σπουδης] so εστί. ' to
whom it is a serious thing, and who
μ’ not make this also, like other things,
α subject of light conversation.’ 10. τοὺς ἱππικούς] sc. ἀγωνας, or
perh. δρόμους. 12. ερεσχελία] ‘ disputing for fun?
esp. with a view to provoking, as distinguished
from ’ talking in earnest. ’ 13. τίνα] neut. plur. ; ’on what
subjects?’ ib. εφικτά] ’ within our reach.’ 14. εξις] appears to mean skill,’
’ acquired power.’  καὶ οὐ λεγω τοῦτο μη δεῖν πάντοτε μεμνησθαι
θεοῦ. μη πάλιν επιφυεσθωσαν ημῖν οἱ πάντα εὔκολοι καὶ
ταχεῖς. μνημονευτεον γὰρ θεοῦ μᾶλλον η ἀναπνευστεον· 2 βλάπτωσιν bc || 3 ὑπερβαίνοντας a || 4 δη] ’δε cd || 6 βαρηθεντες c 4. 7 om τοῦτο a || ii λόγον] νόμον bd 4. τοῖς στεπποῖς των λόγων] though
gr. is fond of the partitive gen. (οἱ
στερροὶ των λόγων = οἱ λόγοι οἱ στερροί),
it seems best here to suppose
τοῖς ’στ’. to be neut., ’the solid qualities
of our discourses? perh. gr. is
still using the metaphor or simile of
food. it would seem to suit καταπιεσθεντες
κ. βαρυνθεντες as well as
τοῖς στερροῖς. cf. heb. v 12 στερεά
τροφη). 6. ζημ. καὶ εἰς τ. ἁ. δ.] the εἰς
does not denote the extent of the
damage, but the quarter in which it
is felt. over-strong meat not only
fails to increase the vital forces of
those to whom it is administered;
it even impairs those which they
possessed. cp. v 26. 4. it is always right to think of
god; but not always suitable to discourse
of him. 8. επιφυεσθωσαν] επιφύειν is ’to
plant upon ’ ; hence in pass. ‘to fasten
upon and cling ’ like hounds upon
a quarry. plutarch frequently uses
the word in this way; e.g. § 1
επιφυομενους, ωσπερ θηρίοις εὐγενεῖς
σκύλακας. gr. uses it again in v ιι. ib. οἱ π. εὔκολοι] ‘ who are always
(lit. in all points) so agile and ’
ὕκολος (cp. δύσκολος), from κόλον,
’diet,’ means originally one whose
food agrees with him. hence it
comes to be used for facility in any
direction. plato legg. 942 d uses
the substantive in the sense of bodily
activity, which (metaphorically applied)
plied) is the sense here. 9. μνημον. κτλ.] ’it is more necessary
to remember god than to
breathe.’ 11 . των επ’. εἰμι] ‘ am one of those
who approve.’ ib. μελετᾷν ημ’. κ. νυκτός] psalm
i 2 (josh, i 8). 12. εσπερας κτλ.] psalm liv 18
(lv ι7). 13. εὐλογεῖν κτλ.] psalm xxxiii 2
(xxxiv 1). 14. κοιταζόμενον κτλ.] deut. vi
7 (cp. xi 19).  μηδαμως, ω φίλοι καὶ ἀδελφοί· ἀδελφοὺς γὰρ
ὑμᾶς ετι καλω, καίπερ οὐκ ἀδελφικως εχοντας· μη οὕτω
διανοωμεθα, μηδε καθάπερ ἵπποι θερμοὶ καὶ δυσκάθεκτοι,
τὸν επιβάτην λογισμὸν ἀπορρίψαντες, καὶ την καλως 3 εὐσεβες acd ’duo colb. coisl. 3 or. 1 ’ 2. θεολογεῖν] = τὸ περὶ θεοῦ φιλο-
σοφεῖν (supra), ‘to discuss theology.’ ib. ωσπερ ἀσεβες] ‘ as though it
were wrong in itself? the reading
εὐσεβες, though well attested, appears
to be the result of misunderstanding.
it would mean, ’ nor do i forbid
theology, if done in a godly manner.’ 4. την ἀμετρίαν] ‘ nor is it the
function of a teacher that i object to,
but want of judgment in the exercise
of it.' ib. η μελιτος κτλ.] prov. xxv 16.
καίπερ ὄντος μ., ‘ honey though it ’
i.e. the best of things in itself. 5. καιρὸς τω π. π.] eccl. iii 1 ;
ως σ. κἀμοὶ δ., ‘ there is α time... as
solomon and i think.’ 6. τὸ καλὸν οὐ κ.] the saying is
quoted as a proverbial one ὅ φασιν)
in the clementine epitome § 18. 7. ἄνθος εν χ.] rather a curious
instance to choose, — as if people
would object to flowers in winter. 9. πενθει γεωμ.] geometry was,
so maximus suggests, a recreation
and a joy. indeed, according to
him, it formed part of the musical
curriculum, and as such is included
in the warning of ecclus. xxii 6.
after this suggestion max. gives up
the enquiry into gr.'s meaning.
perhaps it was not necessary to go
so far into it. or. is only taking examples
of irksome incongruity. ib. ενταῦθα δε] ‘ and shall we in
this case alone disregard “ the time ”?’ 5. we should not discuss theology
before the heathen. tiny turn our
dissensions into a defence of heathenism,
and come down upon our weaknesses
like flies upon a sore. they
would themselves rather die than divule
their mysteries. we must learn
the decencies of speech. 13. οὐκ ἀδελφικως εχ.] ’ although
so unbrotherly ’ cp. aug.
serm. ccclvii 4, quiduis dicas, quantumlibet
odens, at placuerit detesteris,
teris, frater meus es. 14. θερμοὶ κ. δυσκάθεκτοι] θ. is
‘wild,’ ‘excited’ ; δυσκ. (from κατεχειν),
‘hard to hold in.' xenophon
uses it id the same sense. 15. επιβάτην] more usually signifies
’ a rider ’ ; but here the metaphor
is probably taken from a chariot race,
and επιβ. will mean ’ the man in the
’ i.e. the driver. the word
is elsewhere used in a more restricted
sense, of the man who fights in a
chariot, not the driver; but it is
evidently not so intended here. 1. ἄγχουσαν] lit. ‘throttling,’
‘strangling’; here ‘restraining.’ ib. ἀποπτύσαντες] lit. ‘ slitting
out,’ i.e. ‘ getting the bit out of our
mouths.’ it is used by other authors
of the same action. ib. πόρρωτηςνύσσης θεωμεν] ‘dash
wide of the .’ νύσσα
(lat. meta) is the καμπτηρ, or post,
round which the chariot turns to do
the second lap of the δίαυλος. naturally,
it ought to be barely euitata
rotis. 2. εἵσω τ. ημ’. ὅρων] the metaphor
phor begins to change; and gr.
’s, as the following words shew,
’within the holy ’ i.e. within
the church. the egypt and assyria
are the heathen world, — not, as elias
and others take it, heretical christians. 3. εκφερωμεθα . . . κατασυρωμεθα]
the metaphor of the runaway chariot
seems not to have wholly disappeared.
there is, of course, a reference
to such passages as hos. ix 3. 4. την ωδην κ.] psalm exxxvi
cexxxvii) 4. 5. πάσης ἀκοης λεγω] ‘ι mean
any and every ’ ‘akoης is
grammatically in apposition to γης. 6. εὐγνωμονος κ. ἂγ ἀγν.] ‘sympathetic
thetic or unsympathetic.’ this seems
from the context to be the intended
meaning; but it would be equally in
accordance with the usage of the
words to understand (as elias does)
‘ sensible and senseless. ’ ib. η] very naturally refers only
to the ἀκοη ἀγνωμων, or the γη ἀλ-
λοτρία. 7. τὰ ημεμτερα...των εν ημ’. κακων]
the heathen and unconverted keep
a watch upon christians, and make
the most of anything among them
that is wrong ; ‘ would like the spark
...to become a flame.’ 8. ἀναρριπίζει] ’fans it up ’ ; from
ῥιπίς, ‘a fan.’ 9. λανθάνουσα] i.e. without our
seeing what they are about. 10. της baβ. φλογός] dan. iii 23
(lxx.). 11. δόγμασιν] ‘ received ’ ;
used of heathen beliefs in general, —
possibly of the doctrines of heathen
philosophers in particular. 3 om ημας a ιι 5 εκείνω d || 14 φιλονεικεῖν b 1. οὕτω τοῖς ημετεροις] agrees with
ἀτυχημασι, ἁμαρτημασι, — the sen-
tence being interrupted for rhetorical
effect : ‘ to our — am ι to call them
misfortunes or mistakes?’ 2. μη επὶ πλεῖον ημ’. αὖ. ἀγν.] ‘ any
further be ignorant ofotir οwn selves. ’
our enemies know us, while we do
not know ourselves, or see the consequences
of what we are doing. 3. τὸ περὶ ταῦτα κ. ἄτιμ’.] 'disregard
what is seemly in these questions,'
i.e. by disputing before the
world. cp. τὸν καιπὸν ἄτιμ’. supra. 4. την εχθραν] not that of the
common enemy, of whom dr. has
been speaking, but that of christians
among themselves. 5. μυστικως τὰ μυστικά] we have
unfortunately lost in english the
primary meaning of a ’mystery,’ so
that the words can only be paraphrased
; — ’to utter what concerns the
secrets of religion in religious ’
μυστικως is used in liturgical geek
for ‘ in a whisper.’ 6. μη ῥίπτειν κτλ.] cp. matt.
vii 6. 7. ἀποφαίνωμεν] ἀποφαίνειν in
late greek often ’to make.
here ‘ to prove' would give an
suitable meaning. 8. προσκυν. τοῖς δ] προσκ. in the
later greek governs dat. or ace.
indifferently; e.g. john iv 23 πρ.
τω πατρί. . . τοὺς προσκυνοῦντας αὐτόν.
just below we have πρ. τὰ πάθη. 10. λόγων εστιν ων] =ενίων,
impart some words.’ 11. εσθητος κτλ.] cp. ecclus. xix
30. 13. λόγον πρεσβεύομεν] ἱν ‘werank,
or honour, word among tht appellations
and powers of god himself.’ 14. τὸ φιλόνεικον] ’let our very
contention be subject to law.'
whole of gr.'s or xxxii is on
in discussion. 6. the heathen world, with its
base mythology, is not in a ??
to understand the niceties of christian
v. it must inevitably attach
unworthy meanings to the phraseology
which it hears us use.  τί γεννησιν ἀκούει θεοῦ καὶ κτίσιν, καὶ θεὸν
οὐκ ὄντων, καὶ τομην καὶ διαίρεσιν καὶ ἀνάλυσιν, ὁ πικρὸς
των λεγομενων ἀκροατης ; τί δικαστὰς τοὺς κατηγόρους
καθίζομεν; τί τὰ ξίφη τοῖς εχθροῖς εγχειρίξομεν ; πως, 6. 3 ακροατης] εξεταστης b 1. γεννησιν. . .κ. κτίσιν] the one
is an orthodox word and the other
a heretical one ; but gr. deprecates
the using of both alike before a promiscuous
public. ib. θεὸν εξ οὐκ ὄντων] the arians
affirmed that the son εξ οὐκ ὄντων
εγενετο, but of course denied that
he was in the full sense θεός. gr.,
however, is speaking of the effect
produced upon the heathen by the
varying language of professing
christians. 2. τομην κ. διαίρεσιν κ. ἀνάλυσιν]
these are not to be taken (as elias
and others take them) as technical
terms of theology ; nor are they
strictly parallel to the first three
accusatives after ἀκούει. the ἀκροατης
hears οf ‘ begetting ’ and ‘creation’;
he hears ’dissection and division
and analysis.’ 4. καθίζομεν] as in i cor. v 4. 6. επαινων] inasmuch as he attributes
such actions to the gods. 8. ὁ χθες κτλ.] gr. does not
mean that he no longer worships
those gods, but rather that he has
not worshipped them very long. the
heathen is accustomed to making new
gods. 9. οὐχ ὑλικως] he cannot but
put a material construction upon
such language. ἀμαθως will mean
‘grossly.’ 10. συνηγορον] he will turn what
you say about god into an advocacy
of his own deified passions. 12. ταῖς φωναῖς τ. επηρεάζομεν]
the eunomians ‘ maltreated these
’ by maintaining that,
because the son is begotten, the
father must have existed before
him. at the same time gr. does
not acquit his own party of a similar
misuse of terms, as is seen by what
follows, though in their case the
misuse lay in a different direction. 13. φίλ’. εν τοῖς ημετεροις] τοῖς ημ’.
is prob. neuter, ‘ in our quarters ’
’ in our ’; but it may be masc.,
‘ among our ’ in either
case, of course, it means, ’to adopt
and use our system of ’ the
term φιλοσοφία was early applied to
christianity. see melito ap. eus.
hist. eccl. iv xxvi 7 η καθ’ ημᾶς
φιλοσοφία.  'eπεὶ δε ἀπεσκευασάμεθα τοῦ λόγου τὸ ἀλλότριον,
καὶ εἰς την ἀγελην των χοίρων ἀπεπεμψάμεθα τὸν πολὺν
λεγεωνα κατὰ βυθων ων χωρησαντα, ὃ δεύτερόν εστι, πρὸς
ημᾶς αὐτοὺς ἴδωμεν, καὶ ξεσωμεν εἰς κάλλος, ωσπερ ἀνδρι- 7. 9 βυθων] -θου b || χωρησαντα] -σοντα a || εστι]+τουτο ποιησωμεν b
11 πρωτον] πρότερον a 1. εφευρεταὶ κακων] rom. i 30. ib. των διδομενων] ‘ the evil tilings
that we give .’ gr. means, no
doubt, disrelish for divine truth,
which christians set forth so unattractively. 2. ταῦτα] sc. εστίν. ‘ this is
what our war of christian against
christian comes to ,’ this is what
comes of it.’ 3. ὑπερ τ. λ.] catholics were
to blame, in gr.’s estimation, as
well as heretics. 4. ταὐτὸν πάσχοντες τ. μ.] the
idiomatic use of πάσχειν, ’ to be in a
given frame of mind ’ ; almost = ‘ behaving
like.’ 5. ἀνάπτουσιν] like εξάπτει above,
‘ to set on fire. ’ 6. περιωθεῖν) ‘ to push about,’ i.e.
to treat with violence and indignity.
so in or. in jul. i gr. says τοὺς
εμμενοντας τη ὁμολογίᾳ περιωθων. 7. why should we contend ἃς we
do ? there are plenty οf other th things
to occupy our thoughts, the exercises
of philanthropy, and devotion, and
self discipline. but we not only neglect
these ourselves ; we give other
men license to sin, if by that means
we can get their support in our party
warfare. 7. τὸ ἀλλότριον] gr. does not
say τούς ἀλλοτρίως, i.e. the heathen.
he means the false and heathenish
element which had been introduced
into christian language. τοῦ λόγου,
however, depends on ἀπεσκ. , not on
τὸ ἀλλ. 8. εἰς την ἂγ. τ. χ.] mark v 9
foil. βy the ‘ legion ’ gr. means
the gross and unworthy spirit which
had instigated the contentions which
he has been deploring. ib. ἀπεπ....κατὰ βυθων χωρησαντα]
’ we have sent it away and it has
gone.’ κατὰ βυθων answers to the
κατὰ τοῦ κρημνοῦ of the gospels ;
but it appears to be influenced by
the remembrance of εἰς την ἄβυσσον
of luke viii 31. 9. ὅ δεύτερόν εστι, πρός] the
relative looks on to what follows :
‘ the next thing is, to. ’ 10. ωσπερ ἀνδριάντα] cp. plat.
rep. ii § 5 ως ερρωμενως εκάτερον,
ωσπερ ἀνδριάντα, εκκαθαίρεις. 12. γλωσσαλγία] α classical
word for ‘talkativeness,’ much used
by gr. 5 ὑποπιεζομεν] ὑπωπιάζομεν d 1. τὰς χ. δησαντες] ‘ though our
hands are tied.’ 2. οὐ φιλοξ. επαινοῦμεν ;] the
string of questions which follows is
intended to shew the inconsistency
of this γλωσσαλγία with the οccupations
pations which it is assumed that
christians are following. 3. φιλοπτωχίας. gr.'s or.
is περὶ φιλοπτωχίας. the zeal of his
friend basil in that direction is well
known : see de broglie l'eglise
v empire t. v p. 186 (3rd ed.). 4. πάννυχον στάσιν] cp. or. xlii
26 χαίρετε, ναζαραίων χοροστασίαι,
ψαλμωδιων ἁρμονίαι, στάσεις παννυχοι.
the word στάσις appears to
correspond to lat. statio, in the
sense of ‘α service.' it is
from the custom of standing for
prayer. 5. ὑποπιεζομεν] ‘ crush down,'
‘ suppress. ’ 6. πρ. θεὸν εκδημοῦμεν] cp. 7. τὸν χοῦν] 1 cor. xv 47 ; gen.
ii 7. ib. οἱ τω κράματι δ. δικάζοντες]
the κρᾶμα is the human compound
of soul and body, or ‘ dust ’ and
’spirit.’ upon this, i.e. upon the
rival claims of the constituent elements,
man has to pass judgment. 10. της ἄνωθεν εὐγενείας] peril.
with reference to john iii 3. ib. τιθασσεύομεν] ‘ to tame,' from
τίθασσος ‘tame’ ; opp. to ἄγριος
’wild ’ ‘eξοιδεῖν ‘ swell up.' 11. επαρσιν καταβάλλουσαν] sc.
τιθασσύομεν. cp. prov. xvi 18 and
similar passages. 14. διάνοιαν εκτοπον] εκτ. seems
to be used as practically = ἄτοπος,
‘improper,’ ‘ unseemly.' ib. παρ’ ημων. . . καθ’ ημων] i.e.
finds in us and uses against us. 15. διὰ των θυρίδων] jer. ix 21.
the same interpretation is given by
greg. nyss. de dom. οrat. v, by
ambrose de fuga saec. ε 3 and in
psalm, cxuiii exp. vi ε 20, and by
jerome adv. jovin. ii p. 202 (mart.).
it became the traditional interpretation.
cp. greg. moral, xxi 2 ; bern.
in cant. 24.  καίτοιγε, ω διαλεκτικε καὶ λάλε, ερωτησω σε τι
μικρόν· σὺ δε ἀπόκριναί, φησι τω ἰωβ ὁ διὰ λαίλαπος καὶ
νεφων χρηματίζων. πότερον πολλαὶ μοναὶ παρὰ τω θεω,
ὅπερ ἀκούεις, η μία; πολλαί, δωσεις δηλαδη, καὶ οὐ μία. 3 βασιλεις] βασιλικοι b || 4 νευωσι] -σωσι d || θεου] του θεου b || θρα-
συτερον] + η ευσεβεστερον b 8. 14 ποτε] + εστι c || θησεις] -ση d i. εἴτουν] i.e. εἴτε οὖν, in late
greek = sive, and is used for ‘that is
to say.?’ ib. μεν οὖν] = immo, ‘nay.’ so
far from ruling our own passions,
gr. says, we give license to those of
others. 3. επινικίους ἀφεσεις] elias understands
it of the manumission of
slaves; but a more usual form of
celebrating a triumph was to release
prisoners, and that is prob. the comparison
here. ib. μόνον ἄν] this is the sole
condition of the release, that they
should tend to promote our cause.
gr. is prob. referring to the way in
which, in his time as in other times,
the sins of powerful patrons were
treated with complaisance. of course
he has the arians chiefly in view.
they laid themselves open to the
charge; and it is of them esp. that
gr. uses the expression κατὰ θεοῦ
φερ., ‘to rush against god.’ 5. της ἀσεβείας την παρρησίαν]
ἀσεβ. is in apposition to οὐ καλοῦ
πρ., την παρρ. to μισθόν. in exchange
for their serviceable impiety,
they are allowed to sin unrebuked. 8. there are ‘ many mansions ’
above, and they are reached by many
ways, though in one sense the many
ways are the one strait and narrow
way. why should we leave all the
other ways for the way of
controversy? 8. σὺ δε ἀπόκριναι] job xxxviii
3. 9. χρηματίζων] ‘to answer’ when
consulted, esp. as an oracle. it is
not the word used in job xxxviii 1
(lxx.), but it occurs in the similar
passage xl 3 (8). ib. πολλαὶ μοναί] john xiv 2.
ἀκούεις = ‘ you are taught.’ 10. δωσεις] ‘you will grant.’ 13. ὅ τί ποτε θησεις] like δίδωμι,
used in a logical sense; ‘what you
will affirm this “mansion” to be.’
ταύτην την μονην is a somewhat
curious use of the singular. it is a
kind of attraction for τοῦτο τὸ μονην,
i.e. ‘the word μονην in this
connexion.’ 14. εκεῖθεν] ‘on yonder side.’ 2 οὐκ ἄλλο] + τι d || επειδη τοῦτο] επει ’δε κἀκεῖνο b : επει ’δε τοῦτο c ||
8 ’τον αὐτὸν] των ἀυτων b || g ἅπασας] πάσας d 4. προξενοῦν] quite classical in
the derived sense of ’ to prouide,’
’ procure.’ here the plural, as the
reply shews, is emphatic; ’ these
different mansions. ’ ib. ως ὁ εμὸς λόγος] ’as i maintain.’ 5. τὸ διαφόρους κτλ.] the ‘mansions’
vary as the lives which men
live πολιτείας) and the aims which
they set before themselves (προαιρεσεις).
it is somewhat tempting, in
the context, to understand προαιρεσεις
of ’schools of ’ lucian
(demon. § 4) speaks of αἰ εν φιλοσοφίᾳ
προαιρεσεις. (cp. the use of
αἵρεσις.) but the other is perh. the
simpler. 6. κατὰ την ἀναλογίαν τ. π.]
rom. xii 6. these various types of
life and pursuits are like so many
roads. they do not lead to the
same place. the places to which
they lead differ ‘ according to the
proportion of faith,’ i.e. are suited to
the various degrees and forms of
religious principle by which men
come to them. 8. εἰ μεν οἷόν τε τὸν αὐτόν] the
man under examination replies that,
if it were possible, it would be well
for the individual to follow all the
roads, i.e. to combine in himself all
characteristic pursuits and moral
activities which lead to the various
’mansions’; failing this, to combine
as many as he can; but excellence
in any one of them is a great
achievement. 12. μίαν ὁδὸν. . . στενην] μatt. vii
13. 13. διὰ την ἀρετην] because it is
the way of virtue; for the way of
virtue is one, although it has many
branches. 14. διὰ τοὺς ἰδρ. κτλ.] because
of the effort it demands, and because
few are found able to tread it,
in comparison of the great number
who take the contrary direction,
and who walk in the way of vice.
the καὶ couples the antecedent of
ὅσοι to των εναντίων.  εστω δε· ὑψηλὸς σύ, καὶ ὑψηλων περα, καὶ ὑπερ
τὰς νεφελας, εἰ βούλει, ὁ των ἀθεάτων θεατης, ὁ των 6 om ως μεν αὐτοὶ οἴεσθε a ’ duo ’ : om μεν d 3. ωσπερ τ. πενίαν καταγν. τ. ημ’.
λόγου] καταγ. τί τινος is to find
something to ’s disadvantage:
’why do you profess to have
found our principles poor ? ’ 5. πρὸς μίαν ταύτην] not, of
course, the μία ὁδὸς στενη spoken of
above — which included πάσας τὰς
ἄλλας ὀδούς, — but a single branch of
that road. gr. grants that the road
of the διαλεκτικὸς is not a bad road,
if it were properly pursued ; but it is,
as he has compelled the opponent to
admit, a loss to follow that one road
to the exclusion of all others, and so
to forfeit the ’many,’ and perh. the
better, mansions. this is indeed to
incur a πενία, unknown to the faithful
followers τοῦ ημετερου λόγου.
gr.'s conception of the
’all attainable to the individual,
not successively, but by walking
simultaneously along many roads
which lead to them, is a conception
difficult to grasp, but suggestive of
a noble fulness of living energy. ib. ωθεῖσθε] ‘crowd along,' ’ force
your way in a herd'; heard';
73 ωθεῖσθ’ ωσπερ ὕες. 7. ἀδολ. κ. τερατείας] ‘αδολεσχία
is ’idle ’: elias explains
τερατεία by τὸ πλάττειν ἄτοπά τε
καὶ ἀλλόκοτα, ’saying extraordinary
things to electrify ’ cp. ar.
nub. 418. the verb τερατεύεσθαι
comes below in ε 10. 8. ἀπαρίθμησιν] ‘enumeration. ’
1 cor. xii 29. it is a little strange
that gr. should select a passage
where st paul is insisting on the
limitation of spiritual gifts, and their
assignment to the various members
of the church, instead of being accumulated
upon each. but prob.
gr. does not concern himself with
the context of the passage, and intends
the ’rebuke’ to apply to the
διαλεκτικὸς inasmuch as he gives
himself the airs of an ‘ apostle ’ or a
‘prophet. ’ 9. εν οἶς φησι] ‘where he ’
it seems best not to make χαρισμάτων
the antecedent of οἷς. 9. however exalted you may be
yourself, you cannot make other
people theologians suddenly. that,
however, is what you profess to do,
and then you crowed councils with
the conceited rabble that you have
collected. 11. ωτω δε· ὁ. σὺ] assuming
that you have the gifts which you
imagine, why do you make such a
bad use of them ? in ὑψ. περα it is
doubtful whether ὑψ. is neut. or
masc., ’beyond the heights ,’ or 'be-
yond the high ones.’ 9. 1 και ο μετα] και μετα c || 6 om υφασμασιν ad ‘duo reg. duo
colb. or. 1’ 1. ἀρρητων] 2 cor. xii 4. cp.
μετὰ π. οὐράνιος below. ib. μ.ηλίαν μ.]4(2) kingsii 11. ib. μ. μωυσεα θ. ηξ.] ex. xxxiv 6. 3. αὐθημερον πλ. ἁγίους] it is
assumed, from their setting up as
theologians, that they have passed
through the moral discipline which
gr. requires before so doing (p. 4
supra); but the discipline must have
been hurried through ‘all in a day?’
ib. χειροτονεῖς θ....εμπνεῖς τ. π.]
the same thought carried on. these
men’s theology has come to them,
not by long study and careful training,
but by a touch or a breath.
xειρ. prob. alludes to the act of
laying on of hands in ordination,
though gr. does not necessarily
imply that the men had been actually
ordained. the word, however, may
perh. only mean ‘elect?,’ ‘appoint.’
in either case the process is characterized
as both arbitrary and sudden . 4. εμπνεῖς] elias supposes a ref.
to such passages as gen. ii 7 or job
xxvii 3. if the allusion to ordination
in χειρ. were secure, it would
be natural to connect εμπν. with john
xx 22 (ενεφύσησεν). there is no
evidence, however, that any ceremony
of breathing was used in gr.’s
time in ordaining; and it seems
simpler to regard the word as denoting
only a quick and miraculous
way of imparting the knowledge of
divine things. 5. π. συνεδρια] so equipped,
the theologians pass to those ‘multitudinous
councils’ which were the
chief feature of church history in
the fourth century. gr., as is well
known, had no high opinion of
councils at the best (stanley eastern
church p. 74). λογίων points both
to the assurance with which these
men spoke, and to the source of their
inspiration (εμπνεῖς). 6. ενδεσμεῖς] a rare word; ‘to
put in bonds.’ the ‘spider’s webs’
are of course the dogmatic subtleties
by which they entangle weak opponents.
cp. orat. xxv § 18. 7. σφηκιάς] he does not seem
to refer again to the heathen; it is
the heretics themselves who swarm
out against the faith,—the same who
are described in the next sentence as
διαλ. ἀνάδοσιν. 8. σχεδιάζεις] the verb denotes
what is hastily prepared out of the
first materials that come to hand,
‘to improvise.’ it thus returns to
the accusation that gr.’s opponents
had had no proper training. ib. δ. ἀνάδοσιν] ἀναδίδωμι is to
‘yield,’ as the earth yields a crop, or
the spring a volume of water. thuc.
iii 88 uses it of aetna, πῦρ κ. καπνὸν
ἀναδ. so ἀνάδοσις is an ‘output’ or
‘outburst.’ διαλεκτικων of course is
masc., ‘dialecticians.’ ib. οἱ μ....τ. γίγαντας] α contracted expression; ‘as the old fables did with the giants,’ meaning, ‘as the old fables said that the earth brought forth the giants.’ it the metaphor of ἀνάδοσιν. the giants, however, are referred to not only because they sprang out of the earth, but because they waged war upon the gods. ἀντιλεγεις καὶ τούτοις; καὶ οὐδαμοῦ σοι τἄλλα; καὶ
την γλωσσαν δεῖ δυναστεύειν πάντως, καὶ οὐ κατεχεις την
ωδῖνα τοῦ λόγου; εχεις καὶ ἄλλας ὑποθεσεις πολλάς τε
καὶ φιλοτίμους. εκεῖ τρεψον μετὰ τοῦ χρησίμου την νόσον.
10. βάλλε μοι πυθαγόρου την σιωπην, καὶ τοὺς κυάμους 1 om τι των ανδρων . . . εκκαρπουμενος acd 1. των ἀνδρων ὅσον κ.] ‘everything
that is worthless in the shape
of men.’ 2. συρφετόν] like περίψημα, ‘offscourings,’
‘sweepings.’ ib. χαράδραν] may be either the
‘torrent’; itself, or the ‘channel,’
natural or artificial, down which it
pours. here perh. the former is
the simplest; the ‘offscourings’ form
a ‘torrent’; but the metaphors are
somewhat entangled. 3. κολακείᾳ] they were ἄνανδροι
to begin with; and the flattery which
they receive from their leaders makes
them worse. ib. καιν. ἀσεβ. εργαστ. εδημ.] ‘you
have created a strange kind of manufactory.’
the heretical leaders have
set up in business, as it were; their
plant and factory consisting of their
dupes. the stress of the sentence
does not lie on the products of the
εργ. (i.e. ἀσεβείας), but on the fact
that the leaders make a living by it. 5. εκκαρπούμενος] ‘profiting by.’ 10. if you cannot be silent, turn
your argumentative powers to use by
refuting the various schools of heathen
philosophy, the absurdities of heathen
worship and magic. or if you prefer
something more original and constructive,
give us a philosophy of
your own, or speak of points of
christian doctrine where there is no
great harm done if a mistake is
made. 6. καὶ τούτοις] i.e. as you oppose
everything else that we say. cp.
the beginning of the sermon.
ib. οὐδαμοῦ σ. τἄλλα] ‘do you
care for nothing else?,’ i.e. than
talking, and talking controversially. 7. δυναστεύειν] not here over
others, but over the man himself.
his tongue is his tyrant. ib. την ωδῖνα τ. λ.] cp. the
somewhat similar image in job xxxii
18 foll. 8. ὑποθεσεις] ‘subjects,’ ‘themes’;
lat. argumenta. 9. φιλοτίμους] we too transfer
the epithet ‘ambitious’ to the subject
from the man who deals with it.
but the usage does not occur commonly
in greek. 10. βάλλε] ‘strike.’ the unsympathetic
attitude here assumed
towards the schools of greek philosophy
does not represent the whole
mind of gr. and his friends. it is
only assumed for a rhetorical purpose. ib. την σιωπην] “the pythagorean
school is represented to us not merely
as a scientific association, but also,
and principally, as a religious and
political society. entrance into it
was only to be obtained by a strict
probation, and on condition of several
years’ silence." “the duration
the silent noviciate is variously
given.’’ zeller pre-socratic
i p. 342 (engl. transl.), where
this ref. of gr. may be added to
those given by zeller. 1. τοὺς κυάμους τ. ὀρφικούς]
“according to later accounts, the
pythagoreans of the higher grade
[lived] in obedience to a minutely
prescribed rule of life... this... enjoined
. . . entire abstinence from . . .
animal food, from beans and some
other kinds of nourishment.’’
op. cit. p. 343 f. “whether
ordinances," he adds, "originated
with the italian pythagoreans, or
only belong to the later orphics of
pythagorean tendencies; whether
consequently they arose from pythagoreanism
or from the orphic
mysteries, we do not certainly know."
zeller speaks of ‘the early connexion
of pythagoreanism with the bacchic
orphic mysteries" (p. 347, first
note). ib. αὐτὸς εφα] “ they rigorously
maintained the doctrine of their
master, and silenced all pposition
with the famous dictum αὐτὸς εφα”:
zeller p. 350. gr. calls this κ. ἀλαζ.
‘an extraordinary piece of swagger.’ 2. τὰς ἰδεας] “plato. . .defines
the idea as that which is common
to the many of like name...this
universal he conceives as separate
from the world of phenomena, —as
absolutely existing substance...the
ideas stand as the eternal prototypes
of being —all other things are copied
from them"; "archetypes, according
to which divine reason fashioned
the world ”: zeller plato and the
older academy pp. 239 foil., 244. 3. μετενσωματωσεις κ. περιόδους]
‘his tran sincorporations and circulations
of our souls.’ see zeller
cit. ch. ix. “at their first birth, all
[souls]...are implanted in human,
and male, bodies; only their lots
vary according to their merit. after
death, all are judged, and placed for
a thousand years, some as a punishment
under the earth, some as a
reward in heaven. this period
having elapsed, they have again to
choose,—the evil as well as the
—a new kind of life; and in this
choice, human souls pass into beasts,
or from beasts back into human
bodies’’ (p. 393). 4. ἀναμνησεις] plato taught that
our souls bring with them into their
earthly existence knowledge acquired
in a previous state of existence. “if
...concepts and cognitions [of an
universal kind] are given us before
any presentation has been appropriated,
we cannot have acquired them
in this life, but must have brought
them with us from a previous life.
the facts of learning and of conceptual
knowledge are only to be
explained by the pre-existence of
the soul. ” zeller p. 395. 5. επὶ ψυχην] ‘directed to,’
as far as,’ and so ‘ concerned
the soul,’ i.e. of the beloved,
it may profess to be unconcerned with
the body. "love...is realised in a
graduated series of different forms.
the first is the love of beautiful
shapes,—of one, and then of all:
higher step is the love of beautiful
souls, which operates in moral words
and efforts, in works of education,
art, and legislation: a third is the
love of beautiful sciences," etc.:
zeller p. 194; cp. ρ. 507. 10. 6 θεων η] + περι b: θεων καὶ ‘or. i’ || ἀγάθων] ἀγαθοποιων d ib. ἀθείαν]=ἀθεότητα. the atheism
of epicurus was of a practical,
rather than theoretical, nature. he
did not deny the existence of gods,
but their interference in the affairs
of men. see zeller stoics, epicureans,
and sceptics p. 464 foil. 1. ἀτόμους] epicurus, whose view
of the universe was purely meterialistic,
taught the eternal existence of
those "primary component parts of
things" which he called ’atoms.’
see zeller op. cit. p. 439 foil.
ib. ηδονην] "the only unconditional
good, according to epicurus,
is pleasure; the only unconditional
evil is pain": zeller p. 473. by
ἀφιλόσοφον gr. means ’unworthy of
a philosopher,’ on the character
‘pleasure’ as understood by epicurus,
see zeller p. 476 foil. 2. τ. μικρολόγον πρόνοιαν] “aristotle's
philosophy excludes the conception
of god's immediate interference
in the course of the universe;
and it would be illegitimate to attribute
to aristotle the popular belief
in providence": zeller aristotle and
the earlier peripatetics 1 p. 422 (cp.
p. 403 and 11 p. 328). the epithet
μικρολόγον would more naturally
apply to a providence concerned
with petty details; (jr. seems to intend
it in a kind of passive sense,
‘of which mean things are ’
cp. θνητοὺς λόγους just below. ib. εντεχνον] ‘ the artificial character
of his system,’ gr., as a master
of rhetoric, prob. has chiefly in view
’s work on rhetoric, at the
beginning of which the word εντεχνος
frequently occurs. ib. θνητοὺς π. ψ. λόγους] ‘ his
mortal language about the soul,’
is impossible to say that aristotle
taught a doctrine of personal immortality.
he taught merely the continued
existence of thinking spirit,
denying to it all the attributes of
personality’’: zeller op. cit.
p. 134. 3. ἀνθρωπικόν] hardly distinguishable
here from ἀνθρωπινον: ‘the
purely human character of his determinations,’
i.e. the absence of anything
divine in his teaching. 4. ὀφρύν] lat. supercilium,
‘haughtiness.’ ib. κυνων] applied to the cynics
as early as arist. rhet. 111 x 7. ib. τὸ λίχνον κ. ἀγοραῖον, ‘the
greed and coarseness,’ zeller
p. 290 speaks of the “coarse
and rude behaviour" of the later
cynics, "their extortions and impositions,
and, despite their beggarly
life...their covetousness." ἀγοραῖον,
cf. acts xvii 5. 5. τὸ κενόν, τὸ πλ. τ. ληρ.] oxymoron;
‘emptiness, full of absurdities. 7. θεαγωγίας, ψυχ.] ‘the calling
up of gods, and of souls.’ 1 ἄστρων δυνάμεως] ἄστρων, δυνάμεων b || 3 τούτοις] λόγοις ’or. 1’ ||
4 κἀνταῦθα] κἀντεῦθεν a || παρεξομαι] -ξω c 1 τερατεύονται] cp. τερατεία
above, p. 15. 2. ἀπαξιοῖς λ.] ‘think unworthy
of treatment.’ ib. εληλεγμενα] from ελεγχω. 3. τὰ σά] it is difficult to see
why the subjects which gr. classes
under this head should be so described
anymore than many of the foregoing.
it does not seem to mean ’christian
’ rather than heathen; which
would more naturally have been
called τὰ ημετερα; and besides, such
a subject as ὕλη has nothing distincteively
christian in it. prob. gr.
means ’stick to a line of your own,’
as distinguished from being guided
by the movements of an adversary. ib. τὸ εν τ. φιλότιμον] ‘an ambitious
subject in that line’: cf.
above p. 17. 5. κόσμου η κόσμων] ’the world
or ’ gr. seems to have
entertained the notion of a 'plurality
of worlds.’ ib. ὕλης] ’matter’ ; no doubt gr.
means concerning its nature, origin,
and the like. 6. λογικων φύσεων β. τε κ. χ.]
elias rightly understands gr. to
mean good and bad angels. 8. επιτυγχ...διαμαρτ.] ’to ’
’to miss,’ it certainly seems
that gr. should consider it almost
a matter of inifference whether a
man were right or wrong upon such
matters as the last four which he has
mentioned. but this is evidently
the sense which is required. prob.
he supposed that it was not possible
to go far wrong on such subjects.
any interpretation of ’recompense,’
for instance, which was not really
a denial of recompense, would be
harmless in comparison with the
teaching upon the nature of christ
to which gr. was accustomed from
the eunomians. 9. εντευξόμεθα] used with a refer-
ence to επιτυγχ. just before. even
if we make a few mistakes on points
of subordinate importance, ’we shall
meet and converse with god.’ 10. ὀλίγα] does not seem to be
often used in the plur. in this adverbial
sense. it appears to suggest
the various occasions on which a
little of such intercourse is vouchsafed.
in the contrasted clause,
μικρὸν qualifies ὕστερον, and ἴσως
qualifies τελεωτ., ’soon after,’
more perfectly,’ ’—the ἴσως suggesting
a modest doubt concerning
our share in the great revelation.